Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13717-2, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Electron energization near the electron diffusion region of high beta
asymmetric reconnection

Elin Eriksson (1,2), Andris Vaivads (1), Daniel Graham (1), Andrey Divin (1,3), Yuri Khotyaintsev (1), Emiliya
Yordanova (1), Mats André (1), Barbara Giles (4), Craig Pollock (4), Cristopher Russell (5), Olivier Le Contel
(6), Roy Torbert (7), Robert Ergun (8), Per-Arne Lindqvist (9), and James Burch (10)
(1) Swedish Institute of Space Physics (IRF), Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden (elin.eriksson@irfu.se), (2) Department of Physics
and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden., (3) St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia., (4) NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA., (5) Department of Earth and Space Sciences, University of California,
Los Angeles, California, USA., (6) LPP, Palaiseau, France., (7) Space Science Center, University of New Hampshire, Durham,
New Hampshire, USA., (8) Laboratory of Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, USA., (9) KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden., (10) Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

We present observations of electron energization near the electron diffusion region (EDR) of magnetic reconnection
in a high beta plasma. The reconnection is asymmetric with a moderate guide ﬁeld. Reconnection signatures such
as Hall ﬁelds, electron jets, scale of the current sheet (about 0.5 ion inertial length), and a lack of an ion jet indicate
that the Magnetospheric Multiscale spacecraft are crossing a reconnecting current sheet close to the EDR. Parallel
electron energization are observed on both edges of the current sheet while perpendicular energization is observed
in the center of current sheet. The regions of parallel energization are correlated with the presence of parallel
propagating electrostatic waves that are most probably generated by the accelerated electrons. We show that the
electron energization can be explained by trapping and acceleration due to an electrostatic potential difference,
similar to previous studies on low beta plasma. We conclude that the parallel electron energization mechanisms for
asymmetric reconnection are the same for low and high beta plasma.

