Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-11428, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Extending global continuous geomagnetic ﬁeld reconstructions on
timescales beyond human civilization

Sanja Panovska (1), Catherine Constable (2), and Monika Korte (1)
(1) Helmholtz-Zentrum Potsdam - Deutsches GeoForschungsZentrum GFZ, 2.3 Geomagnetism, Potsdam, Germany
(sanja.panovska@gfz-potsdam.de), (2) Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
USA

Reconstructions of the geomagnetic ﬁeld on long timescales are important to understand the geodynamo processes
in the Earth’s core and validate the ﬁeld behavior observed in numerical simulations. A compilation of paleomag-
netic sediment records and lava ﬂow data was used to constrain the ﬁrst global, time-dependent, geomagnetic ﬁeld
model spanning the past 100ka (GGF100k). We introduced smoothing kernels in the forward modeling to account
for the different temporal resolution of the paleomagnetic sediment records and to ﬁt higher resolution records bet-
ter. The GGF100k model shows comparable spatial, but less temporal resolution compared to available Holocene
geomagnetic ﬁeld models. Using the GGF100k model we studied the dipole moment variations over the past 100
ka, the paleosecular variation activity, the time-averaged ﬁeld, the evolving structure at the core-mantle boundary,
and criteria for Earth-like behavior in geodynamo simulations. Axial dipole moment variations show a good agree-
ment with the paleointensity stacks GLOPIS-75 and PISO-1500. The lowest dipole moment over the past 100 ka
is observed during the Laschamp excursion at 40.9 ka BP, with a value of 2.44×1022 Am2. The Laschamp ﬁeld
instability starts when reverse ﬂux patches appear in low to mid latitudinal regions at the core-mantle boundary
and then move towards the poles. The inverse ﬂux patches enter the tangent cylinders and ﬂuctuate inside for about
2 ka at different periods, ﬁrst in the Northern hemisphere at 41.4 ka BP and then about 2.5 ka later in the Southern
hemisphere. Apart from the Laschamp excursion that is recorded in most of the sediment records, other excursions
appear only in limited regions and cannot be characterized as global events.

