Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-7305, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The challenge of forecasting impacts of ﬂash ﬂoods: test of a simpliﬁed
hydraulic approach and validation based on insurance claim data.

Guillaume Le Bihan (1), Olivier Payrastre (1), Eric Gaume (1), David Moncoulon (2), and Frederic Pons (3)
(1) IFSTTAR, GERS, EE, F-44344 Bouguenais, France (olivier.payrastre@ifsttar.fr), (2) CCR, 157 boulevard Haussmann
75008 Paris, France, (3) Cerema, Direction Méditerranée, 30 rue Albert Einstein, F-13593, Aix-en-Provence, France

Up to now, ﬂash ﬂood monitoring and forecasting systems, based on rainfall radar measurements and dis-
tributed rainfall-runoff models, generally aimed at estimating ﬂood magnitudes - typically discharges or return
periods - at selected river cross-sections. The approach presented here goes one step ahead by proposing an
integrated forecasting chain for the direct assessment of ﬂash ﬂood impacts on inhabited areas (number of
buildings at risk in the presented case studies). The proposed approach includes, in addition to a distributed
rainfall-runoff model, an automatic hydraulic method suited for the computation of ﬂood extent maps on a
dense river network and over large territories. The resulting catalogue of ﬂood extent maps is then combined
with land use data to build a ﬂood impact curve for each considered river reach: i.e. number of inundated build-
ings versus discharge. Theses curves are ﬁnally used to compute estimated impacts based on forecasted discharges.

A ﬁrst application of this approach in the regions of Alès and Draguignan, south-eastern France, has been
recently published (Le Bihan et al., 2017). It includes two types of validation results based on two recent well
documented major ﬂash ﬂoods (respectively the september 2002 and june 2010 ﬂoods). First, the automatically
computed ﬂood extent maps and corresponding water levels are tested against rating curves at available river
gauging stations as well as against local reference or observed ﬂood extent maps. Second, a rich and comprehen-
sive insurance claim database is used to evaluate the relevance of the estimated impacts.

The presentation will be focused here on the second part of this work, i.e. the validation of the whole im-
pacts forecasting chain based on insurance claim data. If successful, this approach could indeed be particularly
interesting to evaluate ﬂash ﬂoods forecasts in ungauged areas. The presentation will detail the methodology used
and the main difﬁculties encountered, related to the speciﬁc features of the insurance data, to the fact that there is
not a simple one to one match between buildings and insurance policies, and ﬁnally to the particularities of the
claims vs policies relation. Despite these difﬁculties, the validation procedure provided encouraging results.

Reference:
Le Bihan, G., Payrastre, O., Gaume, E., Moncoulon, D., and Pons, F.: The challenge of forecasting impacts of
ﬂash ﬂoods: test of a simpliﬁed hydraulic approach and validation based on insurance claim data, Hydrol. Earth
Syst. Sci., 21, 5911-5928, https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-21-5911-2017, 2017.

