Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-2174, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Increased wind risk from sting-jet mid-latitude cyclones in a warmer
climate

Oscar Martinez-Alvarado (1), Suzanne Gray (1), Neil Hart (2), Peter Clark (1), Kevin Hodges (1), and Malcolm
Roberts (3)
(1) University of Reading, Department of Meteorology, Reading, United Kingdom, (2) University of Oxford, School of
Geography and the Environment, Oxford, United Kingdom, (3) Met Ofﬁce, Exeter, United Kingdom

One of the mechanisms whereby a mid-latitude cyclone can produce strong damaging surface winds is through
the generation of sting jets: highly-localised transient jets, descending from the tip of the hooked cloud head
towards the top of the boundary layer within the dry slot. Recent research, based on ERA-Interim data from 1979-
2012, has shown that around 30% of November-March North Atlantic mid-latitude cyclones had the potential to
produce sting jets, with this percentage rising to around 40% for those cyclones classiﬁed as meteorological bombs.

To investigate the changes to these statistics under a warming climate, 13-year global climate simulations
under both present-climate and the IPCC RCP8.5 scenario conditions have been analysed and compared, focusing
again on the North Atlantic region during September - May. As for the ERA-Interim data, a sting-jet precursor
diagnostic is applied to tracked cyclones. This diagnostic, designed for climate-resolution datasets, requires the
presence of conditional symmetric instability and the necessary environmental conditions for it to be released. We
show that the present-day simulation shares the statistical features of sting jet storms found in ERA-Interim. In
contrast, the proportion of extratropical cyclones with the potential to generate sting jets increases to around 45%
in the RCP8.5-scenario simulation. Furthermore, while the proportion of meteorological bombs is similar in the
two climate simulations, the proportion of these storms with the potential to generate sting jets increases to nearly
70% in the RCP8.5 simulation.

The resolved-wind risk over Europe associated with meteorological bombs containing a sting-jet precursor
increases substantially in the future climate; in reality this wind risk is likely to be further enhanced by the release
of localised moist instability, unresolved by typical climate models.

