Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-1520, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Land surface temperature measurement with an infrared camera, in-situ
emissivity measurement

Jean-Pierre Monchau (1), Mario Marchetti (2), Laurent Ibos (3), Bruno Saintot (2), Mathieu Kremer (1), and
Nicolas Lalanne (1)
(1) THEMACS Ingénierie, France (monchau@themacs.fr), (2) CEREMA, Nancy, FRANCE, (3) CERTES Université Paris
Est, Créteil, FRANCE

Mobility in adverse winter conditions is a recurring problem that affects economy. The massive salting of roads
affects the ecology of soils, surface waters and groundwater. To mitigate this alteration of ecosystems and to
implement sustainable winter maintenance, thermal mapping of roads is a solution that enables to predict the
risk of ice occurrence and snow accumulation and to limit the salting to what is strictly necessary. To achieve an
unbiased result it is necessary to know the thermal behaviour of the road.
In order to measure the surface temperature of the road with a radiative method, its emissivity and the radiation
from the half space seen from the surface have to be determined. Since the thermal and environmental character-
istics of the road may change along the section considered, the temperature measurement must be carried out on
the entire road. This method is conventionally called "thermal mapping". It consists in measuring the radiation
emitted from the road using an apparatus set on a vehicle embedded into the trafﬁc. It is important to have an
accurate value of the directional emissivity of the monitored surface in the spectral band and in the direction the
detector aimed.
This study presents in-situ directional emissivity measurements in both broadband and in the speciﬁc spectral
band of the infrared camera that was used. Spectral measurements have also been made in laboratory with several
apparatus.
These directional emissivity values have been used to correct the surface temperature measurements made along
the roadway in Paris (France). Land measurements and an aerial thermography campaign have been simultane-
ously carried out. These data were compared with those acquired by a radiometer. Another campaign has been
carried out in the Namibian desert in June 2017 to compare land surface temperature with satellite measurements
from ESA (European Space Agency). Results indicated a good agreement between the data collected by the
different methods. Emissivity measurements have been made too, providing valuable information on pavement
radiative properties.

