Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-4329, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The Meteorological Drivers of the September 2015 Severe Dust Event in
the Eastern Mediterranean

Philipp Gasch (1), Daniel Rieger (2), Carolin Walter (1), Pavel Khain (3), Yoav Levi (3), Peter Knippertz (1), and
Bernhard Vogel (1)
(1) Institute of Meteorology and Climate Research, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
(peter.knippertz@kit.edu), (2) Deutscher Wetterdienst, Offenbach, Germany, (3) Israel Meteorological Service, Bet Dagan,
Israel

In 6–8 September 2015 one of the severest and most unusual dust events on record occurred in the Eastern
Mediterranean. Five people died, hundreds were hospitalized, daily life and trafﬁc in the region were disrupted.
Surprisingly, operational dust transport models were unable to forecast the event and therefore no early warnings
were given to the population.

This study details the reasons for this forecast failure and presents simulations of the event at convection-
permitting resolution using the modelling system ICON-ART. The results allow for an in-depth analysis of the
inﬂuence of the synoptic situation, the complex interaction of multiple driving atmospheric systems and the
mineral dust radiative effect on the dust event. A comparison of the results with observations reveals the quality
of the simulation results with respect to structure and timing of the dust transport. The forecast of the dust event
is improved decisively, most likely due to the explicit representation of convection and a more highly resolved
orography.

The event is triggered by the unusually early occurrence of an active Red Sea trough situation with an
easterly axis over Mesopotamia. The connected sustained organized mesoscale convection produces multiple
cold-pool outﬂows responsible for intense dust emissions. Complexity is added by the interaction with an intense
heat low, the inland-penetrating Eastern Mediterranean sea breeze and the widespread occurrence of supercritical
ﬂow conditions and subsequent hydraulic jumps in the vicinity of the Jordan Rift Valley. The newly implemented
mineral dust radiation interaction leads to systematically more intense and faster propagating cold-pool outﬂows.

This case study demonstrates how processes across a wide range of scales can conspire to produce one of
the most severe dust events on record for this region with large impacts on the population. The results suggest that
high resolution and a sophisticated treatment of convection, dust and radiation is needed for a realistic forecast
and early warning.

