Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-5093, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The Air Pollution and Human Heath in a Chinese Megacity research
program: some early results

James Lee
Univeristy of York, National Centre for Atmospheric Science, Chemistry, York, United Kingdom (james.lee@york.ac.uk)

In China, air pollution is a severe problem with occurrence of haze increasing in severity and frequency between
the 1950s and 2000s. Chinese cities face high particulate matter concentrations, in particular PM2.5 concentrations,
which regularly exceed World Health Organisation (WHO) air quality guidelines. This has been linked to higher
health risks to the cardiovascular system, cerebrovascular system and an increase in the probability of cancer and
premature death.
Atmospheric Pollution and Human Health in a Chinese Megacity is a strategic research programme jointly sup-
ported by the UK’s Natural Environment Research Council and Medical Research Council, and the National Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China. Its aims are to identify the concentrations and sources of urban air pollution in
Beijing, identify how people are exposed, to understand how it affects their health and to determine what can be
done about it. The research is largely based around measurement campaigns that took place in Beijing in winter
2016 and summer 2017.
During summer, elevated levels of ozone were regularly observed, with maximum concentrations of 180 ppbv. On
∼75% of days during this period, ozone breached the recommended WHO 8 hour exposure limit of 60 ppbv. The
highest levels of ozone were observed on days when CO, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and SO2 concentra-
tions were highest, showing the importance of industrial emissions of precursor VOCs for ozone formation. The
importance of different VOCs for in-situ ozone formation is investigated using a simple steady state analysis of
OH reactivity, along with a more detailed analysis using the Master Chemical Mechanism.
The mean daily concentration of PM2.5 in Beijing was 92.0 µg/m3 and 31.2 µg/m3 for winter and summer cam-
paigns respectively. The concentration of organic and elemental carbon measured during the winter campaign was
22.3 and 3.4 µg/m3 respectively. It was found that secondary inorganic aerosols and soil dust accounted for 32.6%
and 9.7% of ﬁne particles at IAP. High contributions of potassium and chloride which represented 4.8% of PM2.5
mass, suggested a large contribution of coal/biomass burning during winter.
In order to understand emissions of primary air pollutants and improve emissions inventories, ﬂuxes of a large
range of pollutants (CO2, CO, NOx, ozone, VOCs and NH3) were measured. In addition, aerosol ﬂuxes were
measured using an Aerosol Mass Spectrometer (non-refractory NH4+, NO3-, SO42-, Cl- and organic aerosol) and
trialling a single particle soot spectrometer for black carbon. Fluxes were similar in magnitude to Western city cen-
tre locations, but with important differences: (a) aerosol emissions included SO2- and Cl- not previously observed;
(b) NH3 ﬂuxes were larger than estimated for UK cities; (c) NOx ﬂuxes were lower than predicted by the emission
inventories.
In addition, the exposure of Beijing inhabitants to key health related pollutants was studied using personal air
pollution monitors and the associated between air pollution exposure and key cardiopulmonary measures was as-
sessed. The contribution of speciﬁc activities, environments and pollution sources to the personal exposure of the
Beijing population to air pollutants derived from outdoor sources was also studied.

