Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-1328, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The Dynamics of Cold Water Upwelled by a Wave-inertia Pump in the
Stratiﬁed Ocean Environment with Vertical Shear

Cayla Dean and Alexander Soloviev
Nova Southeastern University Oceanographic Center, Dania Beach, United States (cd821@nova.edu)

The wave-inertia pumps driven by surface waves are capable of producing ﬂow of cold water to the surface.
The cold water brought from a deeper layer has higher density than the surface water and tends to sink back
down. In this work, the dynamics of the cold water in the stratiﬁed environment with vertical shear is estimated
using computational ﬂuid dynamics software ANSYS Fluent. A 3D large eddy simulation model is initialized
with observational vertical temperature, salinity, and current velocity data from sample locations in the Straits of
Florida. A periodic boundary condition is set along the direction of the current, which allows us to simulate inﬁnite
fetch. The results of the simulation indicate that the cold water brought to the sea surface by a wave-inertia pump
forms a convective jet. This jet plunges into the upper ocean mixed layer and penetrates below the thermocline.
On the way down, the jet partially mixes with the surrounding water reducing the temperature of the upper ocean
layer. The cold jet is also slightly warmed; as a result, when the jet reaches the density equilibrium depth below
the thermocline, it has accumulated some additional heat. The mixing of the cold water produced by the artiﬁcial
upwelling depends on stratiﬁcation, regional ocean circulation, vertical shear, and other environmental parameters.
One potential application of the artiﬁcial upwelling system is the mitigation of hurricane intensity. The ocean heat
content (OHC) is the “fuel” for hurricanes. The surface layer mixing with the upwelled cold water produced by
wave-inertia pumps reduces the OHC accessible to hurricanes. At the same time, the results of the simulation
indicate that some additional heat is accumulated below the thermocline.

