Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-15655-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The September 2017 events and their imprints at Earth and Mars

Jingnan Guo (1), Leila Mays (2), Mateja Dumbovic (3), Manuela Temmer (3), Astrid Veronig (3), Robert
Wimmer-Schweingruber (1), Johan Freiherr von Forstner (1), Donald Hassler (4), Bernd Heber (1), Cary Zeitlin
(5), Bent Ehresmann (4), and Oliver Witasse (6)
(1) University of Kiel, IEAP, Physics, Kiel, Germany (guo@physik.uni-kiel.de), (2) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center,
USA, (3) Institute for Physics, University of Graz, Austria, (4) Southwest Research Institute, Boulder, CO, USA, (5) Leidos,
Houston, Texas, USA, (6) European Space Agency, ESTEC – Science Support Ofﬁce, The Netherlands.

During the declining phase of the current quiet solar cycle, heliospheric activity has suddenly and drastically in-
creased starting from a simple sunspot in Active Region (AR) 2673, which transformed into a complex region with
three X-ﬂares accompanied by several Earth-directed Coronal Mass Ejections (CME) from 4th to 6th of September.

Four days later, on 10th September, the same AR produced solar energetic particles (SEPs) which were
registered as a ground level enhancement (GLE) at Earth and the biggest GLE on the surface of Mars as observed
by the Radiation Assessment Detector (RAD) since the landing of the Curiosity rover in August 2012. Both Earth
and Mars saw an impulsive and intense enhancement of the accelerated protons with energies larger than hundreds
of MeV whereas STEREO-A, despite being at the back-side of the event, detected gradually increasing ﬂuxes
of particles transported there across the heliospheric magnetic ﬁeld. Such high energetic particles were mainly
accelerated by shocks associated with the CMEs also launched on 10th of September.

Three CMEs with similar longitudinal launch directions (between Earth and Mars with the central axis ap-
proximately 100 degrees from Earth and 40-50 degrees from Mars) can be identiﬁed based on STEREO-A and
SOHO LASCO chronograph images. The ﬁrst two had moderate launch speed while the last one had an extremely
fast launch speed (∼ 2500 km/s). The merging and interactions of the three CMEs into an interplanetary CME
(ICME) were very complex through the inner heliosphere and caused a very signiﬁcant Forbush decrease at Mars
three days later, even before the enhanced particle ﬂux recovered to quiet-time level. The arrival of the ICME at
Mars is only a few hours later than that at Earth, despite Mars being 0.5 AU further away from the Sun than Earth.
This timing difference between the ICME arrival at Earth and Mars is likely due to (1) the earlier ICMEs from 4th
and 6th which have considerably changed the interplanetary conditions and (2) the interaction of the ICME with a
High Speed Stream structure passing by Mars.

The 3D launch geometry and direction of the CMEs has been reconstructed based on the Graduated Cylin-
drical Shell (GCS) model and the subsequent ICME propagation has been performed using the WSA-ENLIL plus
cone model, as well as the Drag Based Model (DBM) and CDPP propagation tool. Such modeled ICME arrivals at
Earth and Mars are compared with in-situ measurements and the comparison shows that it is essential to consider
the interactions of different CMEs as well as the spatially and temporally varying interplanetary conditions in
order to better predict the ICME arrival at Earth and other planets.

