Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-16288-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Assessment and Deployment of Bird-Carried Meteorological Sensors for
Microclimate Measurements in Urban Terrain

Rick M. Thomas (1), Ford Cropley (1), A. Rob Mackenzie (1), S. James Reynolds (1), Jonathan P. Sadler (1), Lee
Chapman (1), Andrew Quinn (1), Jian Zhong (1), Ben Schellenberg (2), and Xiaoming Cai (1)
(1) University of Birmingham, United Kingdom (r.thomas@bham.ac.uk), (2) Department of Aerospace Engineering,
University of Bristol

The Cityﬂocks project has been developing and deploying lightweight, fast-response meteorological sensors to be
carried by bird species in urban areas to address the paucity of measurements in the region a few hundred metres
above the urban rooftops. Accurate and fast routine temperature measurements in this region will help further
our understanding of the above-canopy internal boundary layer structure and the spatial variability of Urban
Boundary Layers (Barlow 2014). Data implications include improving forecasting of Urban Heat Island events
and urban weather, improving air pollution modelling and informing sustainable urban planning. Other methods
of making such measurements routinely, such as using manned aircraft or Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), can
be prohibitively expensive or require onerous permissions and logistics to achieve.

A ﬁrst-iteration prototype was carried initially by a trained White-tailed Eagle (Haliaeetus albicilla) and an
Imperial Eagle (Aquila adalberti) to assess probe-mounting locations (back or tail mounted temperature sensor),
other met sensors and the potential for data contamination due to heat generation by birds (Thomas et al. 2017).
Other characterisation tests included car-mounted solar radiation shield tests, UAV-mounted tests for altimeter
testing and ﬁeld tests of temperature responses to solar-heated surface elements.

We present results demonstrating that packages meet their speciﬁed target of measuring at least a 0.5 de-
gree celcius change in temperature over each hundred metres of ﬂight track, as well as accurately recording
their location and orientation using on-board GPS, 3-axis gyroscopes and accelerometers, and a pressure altitude
sensor. The package has been miniaturised and carried by captive homing pigeons (Columba livia) for initial tests
prior to more widespread deployment later in 2018.

1. Barlow, J.F., Progress in observing and modelling the urban boundary layer. Urban Climate, 2014. 10,
Part 2: p. 216-240.
2. Thomas, R.M., et al., Avian Sensor Packages for Meteorological Measurements in Complex Terrain and
Urban Environments. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 2017. (In press. Early release available:
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/10.1175/BAMS-D-16-0181.1).

