Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-11362, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Impact of stochastic parametrisation schemes on El Nino-Southern
Oscillation in the Community Climate System Model

Hannah Christensen and Judith Berner
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Climate and Global Dynamics, Boulder, United States (hannahc@ucar.edu)

Stochastic parametrisations have been used for more than a decade in atmospheric models. They provide a way
to represent model uncertainty through representing the variability of unresolved sub-grid processes, and have
been shown to have a beneﬁcial effect on the spread and mean state for medium- and extended-range forecasts
(e.g. Berner et al, 2017, and references therein). There is also increasing evidence that stochastic parametrisation
of unresolved processes could be beneﬁcial for the climate of an atmospheric model, for example through
noise-induced drift (nonlinear rectiﬁcation), and through enabling the climate simulator to explore other ﬂow
regimes.

We present results showing the impact of including a stochastic parametrisation widely used by the weather
forecasting community on the climate of an Earth system model. The Stochastically Perturbed Parametrisation
Tendencies (SPPT) scheme is included the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community
Climate System Model (CCSM) run at 1-degree resolution in both the atmosphere and ocean. The control version
of CCSM exhibits systematic errors in the representation of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). SPPT
signiﬁcantly improves ENSO in CCSM, improving the power spectrum, amplitude, and the inter- and intra-annual
variability of tropical Paciﬁc sea surface temperatures. We trace these improvements to improved variability in the
zonal winds in CCSM.

A second CCSM control simulation run at 0.25-degree resolution in the atmosphere and 0.1-degree in the
ocean shows improvements to ENSO that are remarkably similar to those from including SPPT. Through
mimicking sub-grid scale variability, stochastic schemes such as SPPT can go some way towards what is achieved
by explicitly resolving that variability, at a fraction of the computational cost.

References:

Berner, J., et al, 2017. Stochastic Parameterization: Towards a new view of Weather and Climate Models.
Bull. Amer. Met. Soc. DOI: 10.1175/BAMS-D-15-00268.1

Christensen, H. M., et al, 2017. Stochastic Parametrisation and the El Nino-Southern Oscillation. J. Cli-
mate. 30(1), 17-38 DOI: 10.1175/JCLI-D-16-0122.1

