Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-2101, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Tibetan Plateau Capacitor Effect during the Summer preceding ENSO:
from the Yellow River climate perspective

Rui Jin (1), Zhiwei Wu (2), and Peng Zhang (1)
(1) Collage of Atmospheric Science, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
(jr_nuist@163.com), (2) Institute of Atmospheric Sciences (IAS), Fudan University, Shanghai, China
(zhiweiwu@fudan.edu.cn)

It is well recognized that El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) may exert a direct impact on the East Asian summer
monsoon rainfall through modulating the Philippine Sea anticyclone variability. Such ENSO associated inﬂuence
is evident in the monsoon region, i.e. Southeast China, the Yangtze River, Korean Peninsula and Japan. It remains
unclear whether and how this ENSO related effect can reach the Yellow River region, a monsoon/arid transition
region. In this study, results show that the year-to-year variations of the Yellow River summer rainfall can be indi-
rectly inﬂuenced by ENSO, during its developing phase. The western Tibetan Plateau snow cover (WTPSC) may
act as a “capacitor”, helping ENSO signal to reach the Yellow River region. During the El Niño developing spring,
the associated diabatic heating in Paciﬁc region can excite an anomalous cyclone over the plateau and anomalous
upward ﬂows over the western plateau. Such circulation conﬁguration favors an excessive WTPSC anomaly in
spring. The more WTPSC may increase the surface albedo, decrease the absorbed net shortwave radiation and
in turn intensify the WTPSC. Through such snow-albedo feedback process, the excessive WTPSC anomaly may
strengthen and persist through summer, which may induce two noticeable wave trains in the upper and lower
troposphere propagating northeastward to the Yellow River region. Associated with the wave trains, a low pres-
sure anomaly prevails over northeast China. To the southwest side of the anomalous low pressure, the abnormal
northerly wind may bring large volumes of dry cold air with little moisture to the Yellow River region, leading
to the anomalous drought there. During the La Niña developing summer, the situation tends to be opposite. As
such, the ENSO associated inﬂuence is tied to the interannual variations of the following summer Yellow River
precipitation, with the development of ENSO from spring.

