Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-18808, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Deposition and dispersion of radio-cesium: sensitivity to meteorological
models and aerosol properties

Mizuo Kajino (1,2), Tsuyoshi Sekiyama (1), Yasuhito Igarashi (1), Kouji Adachi (1), Yuji Zaizen (1), Morihiro
Sawada (2), Yukihiko Satou (3), and Yuichi Moriguchi (4)
(1) Meteorological Research Institute, Tsukuba, Japan (kajino@mri-jma.go.jp), (2) University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan, (3) Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai, Ibaraki, Japan, (4) University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo, Japan

A great number of atmospheric simulations have been conducted to understand the consequences of FDNPP acci-
dent. We came to know wet deposition is important but don’t know to what extent. We know simulations vary but
we don’t know why. Meteorological model comparison with a single dispersion model was conducted to evaluate
the magnitude of uncertainty in meteorological simulations. Among the deposition processes, rainout by liquid
precipitation was the most important process. The fog deposition was the next, which was not considered in any
other models but Katata et al., ACP (2015) and this study. Fog deposition is the main cause for the deposition
in Gunma and Tochigi prefecture. All the simulation underestimated the airborne observation of Cs deposition,
which amounted to 2.6 PBq. The underestimation is approximately 1.5 PBq (1 PBq in Hamadori and 0.4 PBq
in Nakadori). It is due to underestimation of deposition process, which is the main ﬁnding of the meteorological
model ensemble study: Some model overestimated while others underestimated both the precipitation and surface
concentration, and therefore the precipitation and source term estimation should be reasonable and not be the cause
of underestimation. By considering the A-type (Adachi et al., Sci. Rep., 2014) and S-type (Satou et al., Anthro-
pocene, 2016) of Cs-ball particles, associated with the SRV opening of Unit 2 and Hydrogen explosion of Unit
1, respectively, the underestimation of simulated Cs deposition could be signiﬁcantly improved. The maximum
estimation of the additional deposition due to Cs-ball amounted approximately 1 PBq.

