Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-8456-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The severe drought of 2016-2017 in Western Europe

Ricardo Garcia-Herrera (1,2), Jose M. Garrido-Perez (1,2), David Barriopedro (1,2), Carlos Ordóñez (1), Sergio
M. Vicente-Serrano (3), Raquel Nieto (4), Luis Gimeno (4), and Pascal Yiou (5)
(1) Departamento de Física de la Tierra y Astrofísica, Facultad de Ciencias Físicas, Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
28040 Madrid, Spain, (2) Instituto de Geociencias (IGEO, CSIC-UCM), Madrid, Spain, (3) Instituto Pirenaico de Ecología,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas (IPE-CSIC), Zaragoza, Spain, (4) Environmental Physics Laboratory,
Facultade de Ciencias, Universidad de Vigo, 32004 Ourense, Spain, (5) Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de
l’Environnement, UMR 8212 CEA-CNRS-UVSQ, IPSL, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

During 2016-2017, most of Western Europe has suffered a major drought. Associated impacts have been reported
for a number of socio-economic sectors. Crops have been severely affected with the resulting reduction in
agricultural production, especially for cereals, olives and almonds in Spain and Italy. Devastating ﬁres in southern
Europe have led to the evacuation of thousands of people and even human fatalities in Portugal. The energy sector
has also been signiﬁcantly impacted partly due to the drop in hydroelectrical production, which reached a ∼50%
decrease in Spain and coincided with minimum wind energy production, rising the electricity bill to historical
maxima.

The standardised precipitation-evapotranspiration index (SPEI) is used to diagnose this major drought. It is
compared to the standardized precipitation index (SPI) in order to highlight the contribution of meteorological
variables other than precipitation.

The results of the SPEI show that July 2016 - June 2017 has been the most severe 12-month drought of
the reanalysis period over Western Europe. Unlike most mega-droughts in Europe, the event is characterized
by an unusual spatial pattern, with dry conditions over northern and southern Europe. In fact, several countries
such as France, Spain or Germany have experienced a record-breaking drought simultaneously. Nevertheless,
the analysis of the SPI, which only accounts for the precipitation deﬁcit, suggests that this has not been the
driest event on record. Given the discrepancies between the results found for both drought indices, we focus on
analysing individually the variables controlling evapotranspiration to understand their relative roles. Moreover, the
atmospheric circulation and moisture sources have been explored during the driest months in order to assess the
role of synoptic patterns in the spatio-temporal evolution of the drought.

