Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10262, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Terrestrial long-wave infrared hyperspectral imaging for geological
mapping: a case study

Moritz Kirsch (1), Sandra Lorenz (1), Robert Zimmermann (1), Robert Möckel (1), Mahdi Khodadadzadeh (1),
Laura Tusa (1), Martin Chamberland (2), and Richard Gloaguen (1)
(1) Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology, Chemnitzer Str. 40,
09599 Freiberg, Germany, (2) Telops Inc., 100-2600 St-Jean-Baptiste Avenue, Quebec City, Quebec G2E 6J5

Mapping lithology and geological structures accurately remains a challenge in difﬁcult terrain or in active min-
ing areas. Visible to near-infrared (VNIR) and short-wave infrared (SWIR) hyperspectral data has been proven
successful for mapping of alteration minerals under such demanding logistical circumstances. However, many
rock-forming silicates are indistinct in this spectral range. In this regard, hyperspectral long-wave infrared (LWIR)
imaging adds a promising complement to hyperspectral VNIR and SWIR data in the ﬁeld of mineral mapping, since
the molecular vibrations of many rock-forming minerals have characteristic resonant frequencies in the LWIR part
of the electromagnetic spectrum. In this contribution, we demonstrate the use of hyperspectral LWIR data for min-
eral mapping of vertical geological outcrops on the example of the Naundorf gravel quarry in Saxony (Germany),
which features sulﬁde-rich hydrothermal zones in a granitoid host. We describe an integrated workﬂow to produce
a geometrically and spectrally accurate combination of a Structure-from-Motion point cloud and a hyperspectral
LWIR datacube. The data are processed using spectroscopic (e.g., feature matching) and machine learning (e.g.,
Random Forests) algorithms to generate meaningful 2.5 D maps. These provide a basis for mapping of lithological
contacts and tectonic structures in the outcrop. We validate the remote sensing data with laboratory X-ray diffrac-
tion and thin section analysis as well as FTIR point spectrometer data. In combination with ground- or drone-based
photogrammetric and hyperspectral VNIR and SWIR data, LWIR imaging provides a powerful tool for safer and
more efﬁcient ground surveys as well as a better, mathematically sound, sampling strategy for further structural,
geochemical and petrological investigations.

