Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-15916, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The contribution of China’s short-lived pollutants to global climate forcing

Thomas Gasser (1), Bengang Li (2), Philippe Ciais (3), Shilong Piao (2,4), Shu Tao (2), and the Sino-French
Institute for Earth system science (SOFIE) team
(1) International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria (gasser@iiasa.ac.at), (2) College of
Urban and Environmental Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China, (3) Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de
l’Environnement (LSCE/IPSL), Gif-sur-Yvette, France, (4) Institute of Tibetan Plateau Research, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China

Knowledge of the contribution that individual countries have made to global radiative forcing is important to the
implementation of the agreement on “common but differentiated responsibilities” reached by the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.

Over the past three decades, China has experienced rapid economic development, accompanied by increased
emission of greenhouse gases, ozone precursors and aerosols, but the magnitude of the associated radiative forcing
has remained unclear.

Here we use a global coupled biogeochemistry-climate model, and a chemistry and transport model
to
quantify China’s present-day contribution to global radiative forcing due to well-mixed greenhouse gases,
short-lived atmospheric climate forcers, and land-use-induced regional surface albedo changes.
We ﬁnd that China contributes 10% ± 4% of the current global radiative forcing. China’s relative contribu-
tion to the positive (warming) component of global radiative forcing, mainly induced by well-mixed greenhouse
gases and black carbon aerosols, is 12% ± 2%. Its relative contribution to the negative (cooling) component is
15% ± 6%, dominated by the effect of sulfate and nitrate aerosols.
China’s strongest contributions are 0.16 ± 0.02 watts per square metre for CO2 from fossil fuel burning,
0.13 ± 0.05 watts per square metre for methane, −0.11 ± 0.05 watts per square metre for sulfate aerosols, and
0.09 ± 0.06 watts per square metre for black carbon aerosols.

Therefore, in relative terms, China contributes more strongly to cooling climate down than to warming it
up. Although, in absolute terms, China’s emission of active species still has a net warming effect. This overall
picture is mostly painted by the key role of Chinese short-lived pollutants, as China contributes substantially to the
global radiative forcing induced by aerosols (for example, 28% ± 10% of sulfate aerosols, 24% ± 8% of nitrate
aerosols, and 14% ± 6% of black carbon aerosols).

These estimates exclude the effect of aerosol-cloud interactions (also driven by short-lived species). A ten-
tative inclusion of this effect (and other secondary effects that are not well constrained) further reduces China’s
contribution to the global radiative forcing, albeit at the cost of a great increase in uncertainty. We estimate that
China’s global contribution would then be 8% ± 8%.

China’s eventual goal of improving air quality will result in changes in radiative forcing in the coming
years: a reduction of sulfur dioxide emissions would drive a faster future warming, unless offset by larger
reductions of radiative forcing from (sometimes co-emitted) well-mixed greenhouse gases, ozone precursors,
and/or black carbon.

