Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-18974, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

LOFAR for Space Weather (LOFAR4SW) H2020 program

Hanna Rothkaehl (1), René Vermeulen (2,4), Richard Fallows (2), Joris Verbiest (3), Nicole Vilmer (5), Michael
Olberg (6), Mario Bisi (7), and Peter Gallagher (8)
(1) Space Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland (hrot@cbk.waw.pl), (2) ASTRON, Dwingeloo, The
Netherlands, (3) Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany, (4) The International LOFAR Telescope (ILT), Dwingeloo, The
Netherlands, (5) Observatoire de Paris, Paris, France, (6) Onsala Space Observatory (OSO), Onsala, Sweden, (7) The
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (RAL), Chilton, England, (8) Trinity College Dublin ( TCD), Dublin, Ireland

The LOFAR for Space Weather (LOFAR4SW) is an international project the aim of which is to deliver the full
conceptual and technical design for creating a new leading-edge European research facility for space weather
science.
The project will engage with stakeholders to prepare a facility which produces unique research data
with key impact on advance predictions of space weather events affecting crucial technological
infrastructures of today’s society.

The objective of LOFAR4SW is to prepare for a large scale high-end research facility in which completely
simultaneous, independent observing modes and signal paths provide continuous access to two research commu-
nities: radio astronomy and space weather research.

Space weather science aims,
through observation, monitoring, analysis and modelling, at understanding
and ultimately predicting the complex state of the solar wind - magnetosphere - ionosphere - thermosphere system,
and the potential impact on biological and technological systems on Earth. Increased fundamental knowledge,
coupled to large-scale monitoring programs, is needed for much more advanced predictions of the impact of space
weather events on Earth.

A fully-implemented LOFAR4SW system will enable a wide range of solar and space weather research
topics to be tackled and have unique strengths in several high-impact science areas: tracing the initial launch
of a CME; detailed tracking of the solar wind and CMEs through interplanetary space; in-depth studies of
micro-structure in the Earth’s ionosphere.
This facility will uniquely provide the missing link of measurements of the interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld on global
scales – a key parameter in forecasting the severity of geomagnetic storm on Earth. The LOFAR4SW will allow
scientists to to answer many important questions with regard to the solar corona, the heliosphere, and Earth’s
ionosphere.

The action was started on December 2017 and the aim of this presentation is to show the main goals of
the project and the initiated activities

