Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-12216-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Overview of Early Results from TROPOMI on the Copernicus Sentinel 5
Precursor

Pepijn Veefkind (1,2), Quintus Kleipool (1), Antje Ludewig (1), Ilse Aben (3), Angelika Dehn (4), Diego Loyola
(5), Herbert Nett (6), Andreas Richter (7), Michel van Roozendael (8), Richard Siddans (9), Thomas Wagner (10),
Pieternel Levelt (1,2)
(1) Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute, De Bilt, The Netherlands (veefkind@knmi.nl), (2) Delft University of
Technology, Geosciences and Remote Sensing, Delft, The Netherlands, (3) Netherlands Institute for Space Research, Utrecht,
The Netherlands, (4) European Space Research Institute, Frascati, Italy, (5) German Aerospace Center, Wessling, Germany,
(6) European Space Research and Technology Centre, Noordwijk, The Netherlands, (7) University of Bremen, Bremen,
Germany, (8) Belgian Institute for Space Aeronomy, Brussels, Belgium, (9) Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United
Kingdom, (10) Max Planck Institute for Chemistry, Mainz, Germany

On 13 October 2017 the Copernicus Sentinel 5 Precursor (S5P), the ﬁrst of the European Sentinel satellites
dedicated to monitoring of atmospheric composition, was launched. The mission objectives of S5P are to globally
monitor air quality, climate and the ozone layer in the time period between 2017 and 2023. The ﬁrst 6 months of
the mission are used for special observations to commission the satellite and the ground processing systems; the
operational phase will start in April of 2018.

The single payload of the S5P mission is TROPOspheric Monitoring Instrument (TROPOMI), which has
been developed by The Netherlands in cooperation with the European Space Agency (ESA). TROPOMI is a
nadir viewing shortwave spectrometer that measures in the UV-visible wavelength range (270-500 nm), the near
infrared (710-770 nm) and the shortwave infrared (2314-2382 nm).

A major step forward of TROPOMI compared to its predecessors OMI (Ozone Monitoring Instrument) and
SCIAMACHY (Scanning Imaging Absorption Spectrometer for Atmospheric Chartography) is the spatial
resolution. For most of the UV-visible bands TROPOMI has a spatial resolution at nadir of 3.5x7 km2 and 7x7
km2 for the shortwave infrared, wile maintaining or even improving the signal-to-noise per ground pixel. The
high spatial resolution is combined with a wide swath that allows for daily global coverage. The TROPOMI/S5P
geophysical (Level 2) operational data products include nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone (total column,
tropospheric column & proﬁle), methane, sulfur dioxide, formaldehyde and aerosol and cloud parameters.

The S5P will ﬂy in a so-called loose formation with the U.S. Suomi NPP (National Polar-orbiting Partner-
ship) satellite. The primary objective for this formation ﬂying is to use the high spatial resolution cloud
observation capabilities of the VIIRS (Visible Infrared Imager Radiometer Suite). The temporal separation
between TROPOMI and VIIRS is less than 5 minutes. This formation enables synergistic data products and
scientiﬁc research potentials.

In this contribution, we will present an overview of the TROPOMI mission and results obtained early in
the mission.

