Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-6855, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Delving deep into the seaﬂoor: how ocean drilling has revolutionized our
understanding of Cenozoic paleoceanography and climate

Ursula Röhl
MARUM - Center for Marine Environmental Sciences, University of Bremen, Leobener Strasse 8, Bremen, Germany
(uroehl@marum.de)
During the Cenozoic era (past 66 Mio years) Earth(cid:48)s climate system has experienced continuous changes, ranging
from extremes of extensive warmth with ice-free poles, to extremes of cold with massive continental ice-sheets
and polar ice caps. High-quality sediment cores recovered by the ocean drilling programs reveal the detailed
paleoceanographic history through intense studies of these invaluable archives. The improved perspective provided
by these deep-sea records has led to some of the most exciting scientiﬁc developments, including the discovery of
geologically abrupt shifts in climate, as well as “transient” events, brief but extreme excursions often associated
with sincere impacts on global environments and the biosphere, and toward the extension of the “astronomically
calibrated” geological time scale back into the early Cenozoic.
The legendary team spirit and international collaboration have proven to be vital cornerstones of the ocean drilling
programs. With the recovery of high-quality, multiple-hole cored early Cenozoic successions from the Atlantic
and the Paciﬁc, highly suitable material was recovered during several key expeditions to generate stable isotope
records in a resolution never achieved before. Carbon isotope data have evidenced to be highly valuable for
providing insight into the operation of the global carbon cycle, and, in combination with data from the increasingly
established non-destructive core scanning technologies, for stratigraphic correlation. The records have led to the
development of astronomically calibrated age models for the 66–34 Ma interval calibrating the Geological Time
Scale.
During the past almost two decades the high-resolution records have evolved from spliced/stacked bulk isotope
records, stacked benthic isotope records (“Zachos curve”), single site bulk isotope records, single site benthic
isotope records, to single site single species benthic isotope records, increasingly reducing uncertainties and
errors in age models. These records are proven invaluable for developing and testing new theories on mechanisms
of past climate change, and for providing a more accurate framework to assess the inﬂuence of climate on the
environment in ﬁnest detail.
Besides the material from more recent expeditions the archives in the core repositories are equally important –
these cores even hold the potential to help closing important stratigraphic and latitudinal gaps, to provide essential
information towards compiling drilling proposals for potential future expeditions, and eventually derive from
areas where it is currently difﬁcult or impossible to get to due to logistical, budget or safety concerns.
An array of new expeditions is scheduled, e.g. Expedition 378 (“South Paciﬁc Paleogene”) will retrieve unique
sections including crucial time intervals of the early Cenozoic for the South Paciﬁc area.

