Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13427, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Intercomparison of satellite aerosol retrievals in the context of model
evaluation

Nick Schutgens and the AEROSAT team
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Earth & Climate cluster, Life & Earth sciences, Amsterdam, Netherlands
(n.a.j.schutgens@vu.nl)

One important application of satellite aerosol retrievals is the evaluation of global and regional aerosol models.
Proper use of those data requires an understanding of errors in the retrievals. Here we present an intercomparion of
satellite retrieval products of aerosol from 6 different sensors and 10 different algorithms, devised for the satellites
Aqua, AURA, ENVISAT, PARASOL, noaa18, SeaStar and Terra. In addition we compare those satellite products
against AERONET.

Standard evaluation of satellite products is done at individual pixel-level but the temporal and spatial scales
interesting to models are much larger. Hence we perform our analysis at a range of temporal and spatial scales
and show that substantial random errors, amenable to averaging, exists in these satellite products. Furthermore
we show that, where available, AERONET observations usually fall within the range of satellite products. This
suggests it may be possible to create an optimal product by further averaging over different satellite products.

We discuss how this product may be generated, how it can be evaluated and its remaining errors can be
quantiﬁed. This new product is not truelly global because we found some regions where most satellite datasets
appear to have strong biases. Our analysis allows this to be concluded without reference to AERONET, due to our
intercomparion of the satellite data at a range of scales.

Our analysis was performed for aerosol optical thickness and Angstrom exponent. A more limited analysis
of single scattering albedo was performed as well. The analysis was performed on spatio-temporally collocated
data to strongly reduce sampling artifacts. Initial results from the evaluation of AEROCOM models will also be
discussed.

