Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-11994, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

ACE-SPACE: Overview of Southern Ocean aerosols, CCN and INP from a
recent circumnavigation of Antarctica

Julia Schmale (1), Silvia Henning (2), Andrea Baccarini (1), André Welti (2), Iris Thurnherr (3), Franziska
Aemisegger (3), Daniel Rosenfeld (4), Leighton Regayre (5), Irina Gorodetskaya (6), Frank Stratmann (2), Josef
Dommen (1), Martin Gysel (1), Urs Baltensperger (1), Ken Carslaw (5), and the ACE-Atmosphere Team
(1) Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland (julia.schmale@psi.ch), (2) Leibniz-Institute for Tropospheric Research,
Leipzig, Germany, (3) Institute of Atmospheric and Climate Science, ETH, Zürich, Switzerland, (4) Institute of Earth
Sciences, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, (5) Institute for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences, University
of Leeds, Leeds, UK, (6) Centre for Environmental and Marine Sciences, Department of Physics, University of Aveiro,
Portugal, (7) University of Tromso, Tromso, Norway, (8) Centre for Environmental and Agricultural Informatics, University of
Cranﬁeld, Cranﬁeld, UK, (9) University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, (10) Karlsruhe Institute ofKarlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Institute for Meteorology and Climate Research, Karlsruhe, 76344, Germany Technology, (11) Centre for
Atmospheric Science, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

Aerosol-cloud interactions are the least understood anthropogenic inﬂuence on climate change. A major cause of
this limited understanding is the poorly quantiﬁed state of aerosols in the pristine preindustrial atmosphere, which
deﬁnes the baseline against which anthropogenic effects are calculated. Especially over the Southern Ocean,
models grossly underestimate cloud albedo, resulting in biases as large as 30 W m-2 in reﬂected short wave
radiation.

This contribution will provide an overview of the project ‘Antarctic Circumnavigation Expedition: Study of
Preindustrial-like-Aerosol Climate Effects’ (ACE SPACE) whose main purpose was to conduct a comprehensive
aerosol characterization in preindustrial-like conditions over the Southern Ocean. The campaign took place from
December 2016 to March 2017 and covered the Indian, Paciﬁc and Atlantic Oceans between Cape Town, Hobart,
Punta Arenas, and Cape Town, recording aerosol data in some regions for the ﬁrst time. The data set is not only
of interest to understand atmospheric processes under pristine conditions, but also particularly useful to validate
satellite retrievals of aerosol properties and model simulations, which are both essentially unconstrained over the
Southern Ocean.

Here, we will present aerosol microphysical and chemical characteristics and discuss particle and cloud
condensation nuclei (CCN) origin. Important factors inﬂuencing aerosol properties were meteorology, the ther-
modynamic structure of the boundary layer and ocean biological activity (phytoplankton blooms). For example,
the leg between South Africa and Australia experienced a series of low-pressure systems characterized by a
signiﬁcant fraction of Aitken mode particles. Contrary to previous observations, the small mode dominated the
size distribution under calmer conditions and was not necessarily associated with air mass trajectories arriving
from higher altitudes. Near the West-Antarctic coast between Australia and South America, accumulation mode
particles were found to dominate the size distributions that were associated with open ocean air masses and
potentially cloud processing. The mode also contained methane-sulfonic acid, a product from phytoplankton
related dimethyl sulfate emissions. These particles were found to activate between 90 and 100 % as CCN at a
supersaturation of 0.3 %. Conversely, only 26 % of particles arriving with air masses from Antarctica activated as
CCN, primarily because their dominant mode was < 30 nm. A small number of new particle formation events was
observed as well. Preliminary analyses suggest that they were associated with coastal air masses and particles did
not grow into the CCN size range. In addition, throughout the whole voyage, ice nucleating particles (INP) were
measured with a ﬁlter-based method. Cumulative concentrations were low in the order of 1 m-3 at -15◦C.

