Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-14407, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Hydro-geomorphological monitoring of ungauged catchments with
photogrammetric methods

Anette Eltner (1), Hannes Sardemann (1), and Diana Spieler (2)
(1) Technische Universität Dresden, Institute of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Dresden, Germany, (2) Technische
Universität Dresden, Institute of Hydrology and Meteorology, Dresden, Germany

Monitoring of ungauged catchments is of increasing importance due to increasing occurrence of intense pre-
cipitation events. Therefore, the risk for ﬂash ﬂoods increases, as well. However, due to the local appearance
of these extreme events their measurement and hence modelling and prediction are very difﬁcult because of a
commonly sparse gauging infrastructure in small-scaled catchments. Thus, the aim of this study is to develop
new approaches to measure hydromorphological parameters ﬂexible, low-cost and with high temporal as well
as spatial resolution and accuracy. The study is incorporated within the larger research project EXTRUSO
(https://extruso.bu.tu-dresden.de/) aiming at the enhancement of ﬂash ﬂood monitoring, modelling and prediction.
In the presentation two different applications are introduced, i.e. automatic water level measurement using a
low-cost camera and measuring ﬂuvial morphology with an unmanned water vehicle (UWV).

Two low-cost Raspberry Pi cameras are installed at a small-scale and a medium-scale river. The water lev-
els are extracted using the following workﬂow: co-registration of image sequences, detection of water lines using
image processing algorithms, and ﬁnally estimating the height of the water surface using spatial resection of a
projected surface model of the river bank, retrieved with Structure-from-Motion (SfM), in the ﬁeld of view of the
camera. Results reveal accuracies in the range of centimeters using automatically detected water lines and even
sub-cm accuracies if water lines are measured manually in the images.

In the second application an UWV is developed, which allows for an accurate measurement of the ﬂuvial
terrain above and below the water surface with high resolution. Due to the ﬂexible utilization of the device
immediate pre- and post-ﬂash ﬂood event change detection is possible. The UWV is equipped with a laser scanner
that measures the terrain, resulting in a dense 3D point cloud describing the surface. An additional integrated 360◦
camera is used to colorize the 3D point cloud. The third device is an echo sounder to measure the bathymetry. To
realize a direct referencing of the UWV measurements an inertial measurement unit and GPS are implemented, as
well. First results show the potential to measure river sections with sub-dm accuracy.

Both introduced approaches support the densiﬁcation of necessary data to better understand the process of
ﬂash ﬂoods, e.g. implementing the high resolution 3D point clouds in models and potentially use the gauge
measurements as an additional warning tool.

