Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-4459, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

A novel approach for monitoring hydrothermal systems by continuous
magnetotelluric observations

Rolando Carbonari (1), Rosa Di Maio (1), and Zaccaria Petrillo (2)
(1) Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, dell’Ambiente e delle Risorse, Naples,
Italy (rolandocarbonari@hotmail.com), (2) Istituto Nazionale di Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Napoli, Naples, Italy

Understanding the behavior and the evolution of hydrothermal systems is of great interest for both scientiﬁc and
commercial purposes, such as volcanic hazard assessment and geothermal energy exploitation. To this aim, a
novel approach based on continuous magnetotelluric (MT) data is proposed for characterizing and monitoring
hydrothermal systems. The use of such an exploration method has a double advance: it allows i) to monitor time
variations of the electrical resistivity distribution in the underground, closely related to changes in the physical
state of the hydrothermal system, ii) to investigate different depth ranges (from few hundred meters to hundreds
of kilometers) without the aid of artiﬁcial sources, as the energy for the magnetotelluric technique is from natural
electromagnetic source of external origin.
In order to test the effectiveness of the proposed approach, a sensitivity analysis has been performed by simulating
different evolution scenarios of a hydrothermal system and calculating the MT response at different time intervals
corresponding to different stages of the system dynamics. The study proved to be essential for understanding
the degree of sensitivity of the MT method to changes of the hydrothermal system with reference to its possible
temporal evolutions. Indeed, the results of tests carried out for a hydrothermal system in an active volcanic area,
show that if the variations of the system are exclusively determined by an increase in the rate of the ﬂuid ﬂow
emitted by the hydrothermal source, the variations of the parameters that affect the resistivity (i.e. gas saturation
and temperature) are too slow to be appreciated through continuous MT observations within a time period useful
for monitoring purposes. This result, if conﬁrmed also for other types of systems currently under study, would
provide important indications for the monitoring of hydrothermal systems of active volcanoes. In fact, it suggests
that the geophysical methods based on resistivity measurements are not able to detect an increase in the rate of the
ﬂuid ﬂow from the source in a relatively short time. On the contrary, if the variations of the hydrothermal system
are determined by changes in the permeability distribution of the system, caused, for example, by an increase
in pressure or ﬂow of ﬂuids emitted by the source and/or by a variation of their physico-chemical properties,
signiﬁcant variations in the gas saturation distribution are observed over a period ranging from three months
to a year and a half, which give rise to variations in the resistivity values that can be appreciated through MT
observations in the same time interval. This result is of considerable interest, as it proves the usefulness of the MT
method in identifying possible changes in the hydraulic parameters of the hydrothermal system, likely related to
changes in its dynamics.

