Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-261, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Forecasting Solar Energetic Particle Events with the SPARX Forecasting
System.

Simon Thomas (1), Silvia Dalla (1), Timo Laitinen (1), Markus Battarbee (2), and Mike Marsh (3)
(1) University of Central Lancashire, Jeremiah Horrocks Institute, Fylde Road, Preston, PR1 2HE, United Kingdom
(sthomas17@uclan.ac.uk), (2) University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 3 (Fabianinkatu 33), 00014, Helsinki, Finland., (3) Met Ofﬁce,
FitzRoy Road, Exeter, Devon, EX1 3PB, United Kingdom.

Solar Energetic Particles (SEPs) are accelerated by solar ﬂares and shock waves driven by coronal mass ejections.
SEP events are an important space weather hazard due to the signiﬁcant radiation doses these particles can impart
on humans and human technology in space. Indeed the highest energy SEPs can penetrate through Earth’s mag-
netosphere and atmosphere and increase radiation doses at aviation altitudes. We simulate the transport of SEPs
from their release out through the heliospheric magnetic ﬁeld. To do this, we have developed the SPARX SEP
forecasting system which models the SEP event evolution by means of a 3-D test particle approach. In this study,
we compare previous results of the SEP test-particle model, produced using an ideal Parker Spiral magnetic ﬁeld,
with our new simulations using magnetic and electric ﬁelds deduced from the 3-D ENLIL solar wind model. Using
ENLIL model output as input for our SEP forecasts we can study how the energetic particles react to more real-
istic and spatially inhomogeneous magnetic and electric ﬁelds. Our results therefore show the effects of energetic
particle drifts in the presence of natural curvatures and gradients contained within realistic heliospheric structures
from ENLIL, and how they can modify the event evolution from that in a simple Parker spiral geometry. We will
discuss how these heliospheric ﬁelds could be included within real-time forecasting of SEP events.

