Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-12383, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Open Fires in Greenland: An Unusual Event and its Impact on the Albedo
of the Greenland Ice Sheet

Nikolaos Evangeliou (1), Arve Kylling (1), Sabine Eckhardt (1), Viktor Myroniuk (2), Kerstin Stebel (1), Ronan
Paugam (3), Sergiy Zibtsev (2), and Andreas Stohl (1)
(1) NILU - Norwegian Institute for Air Research, Department of Atmospheric and Climate Research (ATMOS), Kjeller,
Norway (nikolaos.evangeliou@nilu.no), (2) National University of Life and Environmental Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev,
Ukraine., (3) King’s College London, London, United Kingdom.

Highly unusual open ﬁres burned in Western Greenland between 31 July and 21 August 2017, after a period of
warm, dry and sunny weather. The ﬁres burned on peat lands that were made vulnerable to ﬁres by permafrost
thawing. We used several satellite data sets to estimate that the total area burned was about 2345 hectares. Based
on assumptions of typical burn depths and BC emission factors for peat ﬁres, we estimate that the ﬁres consumed
a fuel amount of about 117 kt C and produced BC emissions of about 23.5 t. We simulated atmospheric transport
and deposition of BC and found that the smoke plumes were often pushed towards the Greenland Ice Sheet by
westerly winds and thus a large fraction of the BC emissions (7 t or 30%) was deposited on snow or ice covered
surfaces. Analysis of aerosol optical depth data from three sites in Western Greenland in August 2017 showed
strong inﬂuence of forest ﬁre plumes from Canada, but little impact of the Greenland ﬁres. The albedo changes
and instantaneous surface radiative forcing in Greenland due to the ﬁre BC emissions showed that the maximum
albedo change due to the BC deposition was about 0.006, too small to be measured by satellites or other means.
The average instantaneous surface radiative forcing over Greenland at noon on 31 August was 0.03 W/m2, with
locally occurring maximum values of 0.63 W/m2. The average value is at least an order of magnitude smaller than
the radiative forcing due to BC from other sources. Overall, the ﬁres burning in Greenland in summer of 2017 had
little impact on BC deposition on the Greenland Ice Sheet, causing almost negligible extra radiative forcing. This
was due to the – in a global context - still rather small size of the ﬁres. However, the very large fraction of the
BC emissions deposited on the Greenland Ice Sheet makes these ﬁres very efﬁcient climate forcers on a per unit
emission basis. If the expected further warming of Greenland produces much larger ﬁres in the future, this could
indeed cause substantial albedo changes and thus lead to accelerated melting of the Greenland Ice Sheet. The ﬁres
burning in 2017 may be a harbinger of such future changes.

