Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-19330, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Exploring the limits of deep subseaﬂoor geosphere-biosphere interactions
through scientiﬁc ocean drilling

Fumio Inagaki
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC), Yokohama, Japan. (inagaki@jamstec.go.jp)

Over the course of half a century, one of the milestone discoveries that have accomplished by scientiﬁc ocean
drilling is the discovery of microbial life deep beneath the ocean ﬂoor–the deep subseaﬂoor biosphere. Since the
ﬁrst deep biosphere-dedicated Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) Leg 201 off Peru in 2002, numerous microbiological
and biogeochemical studies at various oceanographic and geological locations have been integrated into scientiﬁc
ocean drilling, demonstrating that there are indeed living life forms that have persisted and/or survived under
geophysically and energetically challenging sedimentary and crustal environments over millions of years. Accu-
mulating molecular ecological data at regional to planetary scales suggest that subseaﬂoor microbial communities
consist mainly of uncultured and hence physiologically unknown species that are evolutionary far distinct from
the cultivable microbes living in high-energy habitats on the Earth’s surface. On-going international community
effort including aseptic sampling and multidisciplinary analytical technologies for the deep subseaﬂoor biosphere
is underpinning our knowledge of the functionality of vastly distributed microbial life within the Earth planetary
interior; e.g., during the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) Expedition 329 in 2010, using the drilling
vessel JOIDES Resolution, the presence of dissolved oxygen and aerobic microbial communities was observed
in the entire sediment column of the ultra-oligotrophic South Paciﬁc Gyre, suggesting no limits to microbial life
in the open ocean sedimentary environment. During the IODP Expedition 337 off Shimokita Peninsula, Japan in
2012, the riser-drilling technology of the drilling vessel Chikyu demonstrated that indigenous microbial life oc-
curs in coal-bearing sedimentary environments down to ∼2.5 km below seaﬂoor, which anaerobic functionality
long plays biogeochemical roles in carbon cycling in situ. In 2016, the International Ocean Discovery Program
(IODP) Expedition 370 aimed to explore the temperature limit of the deep subseaﬂoor biosphere in the Nankai
protothrust zone off Cape Muroto, Japan, and daily helicopter-sample transportation from offshore (the Chikyu) to
the onshore laboratory (Kochi Core Center) was successfully accomplished for the state-of-the-art microbiological
processing using super-clean technologies. Consequently, as the community effort, these technological and scien-
tiﬁc challenges to explore the deep subseaﬂoor frontiers are elucidating the global picture of the deep subseaﬂoor
biosphere, establishing a new foundation of how Earth’s planetary sub-systems are systematically connected with
each other and coevolve as a system from the past to the future, and even deciphering our intrinsic question of what
is life in the universe.

