Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-6783, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

A global geomagnetic ﬁeld model with focus on Africa for the past 2000
years

Lisa Kapper (1), Sanja Panovska (2), Sabrina Sanchez (3), and Avto Gogichaishvili (1)
(1) Institute of Geophysics, National Archeomagnetic Service, Campus Morelia, National Autonomous University of Mexico
(UNAM), Morelia, 58190, Mexico, (2) Helmoltz-Zentrum Postdam, Deutsches GeoForschungsZentrum – GFZ
Telegrafenberg, D-14473 Potsdam, Germanyany, (3) Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research, Justus-von-Liebig-Weg
3, 37077, Göttingen, Germany

In the past years, new archeomagnetic records from Africa have helped to improve our understanding of the
geomagnetic ﬁeld on this continent. Global geomagnetic ﬁeld models reconstruct a westward movement of the
South Atlantic Anomaly, a feature of low ﬁeld intensity currently located over South America, which has passed
over Africa within the last 2000 years. Additionally, during this time span two striking intensity peaks were
observed at 800 AD and 1100 AD. However, these features are supported by few data from the African continent.
The general paucity of data from Africa, compared to other regions, might introduce a bias on global geomagnetic
ﬁeld models around this region.
Here we present new archeomagnetic directions and intensities of the geomagnetic ﬁeld from Ivory Coast and
Burkina Faso (West Africa) from furnaces used for iron production. In order to understand the inﬂuence of these
data on a global core ﬁeld model, we perform a sensitivity analysis based on the data kernels. Furthermore,
these data are incorporated in a new global geomagnetic ﬁeld model for the past 2000 years, together with
archaeomagnetic and volcanic data from the Geomagia50.v3.2 and the HISTMAG databases and additional data
not included in these datasets. For a more detailed description of the ﬁeld over Africa, we give a stronger weight
on the African data and interpret the model over the African continent. Finally, we investigate periods of high and
low geomagnetic ﬁeld strength in Africa during the past 2000 years and their relation to the evolution of the South
Atlantic Anomaly.

