Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-7870, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Global Modeling of Oceanic Carbon Monoxide Emissions

Ludivine Conte (1), Sophie Szopa (1), and Laurent Bopp (2)
(1) Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l’Environnement-IPSL-CEA-UVSQ, France, (2) Laboratoire de Météorologie
Dynamique-IPSL, Ecole Nationale Supérieure Paris, France

Carbon monoxide (CO) is an important compound for tropospheric chemistry. It is the dominant sink for hydroxyl
radicals and is involved in ozone chemistry. Hence, atmospheric CO concentrations indirectly affect the lifetime
of greenhouse gases like methane and have impacts on air quality. The ocean has long been recognized as a source
of atmospheric CO. Even if in minority at the global scale, it plays a key role far from continental anthropized
zones. Its marine production is linked to both photooxidation of organic matter and phytoplanktonic activity
and can thus have a large interannual variability. Several campaigns have been carried out to characterize these
emissions and were used to assess the global oceanic source but due to their scarcity and to large heterogeneities
in phytoplankton and organic matter distributions, the extrapolation is rather imprecise. Our study aims to quantify
the CO oceanic emissions at the global scale and to characterize their interannual variability and trends considering
multidecadal global changes. The marine biogeochemical model PISCES, coupled to the ocean general circulation
model NEMO, explicitly represents CO source and sink terms in the ocean. These terms include photoproduction,
which is related to the action of UV on colored dissolved organic matter, phytoplankton production, bacterial
consumption and ﬂuxes at the ocean-atmosphere interface. Simulated oceanic CO concentrations have been
compared to literature reported surface data as well as vertical proﬁles collected around the world during the last
30 years. First results show a global emission of a few TgC per year, with large spatial and seasonal variabilities
in both oceanic concentrations and emissions.

