Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-1090, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Near-real time high-resolution Flash Flood Impact Forecasting

Josias Ritter, Marc Berenguer, Carles Corral, Shinju Park, and Daniel Sempere-Torres
Center of Applied Research in Hydrometeorology, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, BarcelonaTech, Jordi Girona 1-3
(C4), 08034 Barcelona, Spain

The third stage of the EU Floods Directive calls for improving preparedness for ﬂood events, for instance by
setting up hydrometeorological early warning systems. These systems are particularly useful to anticipate ﬂash
ﬂoods that typically occur in small to medium-sized catchments (< 1000 km2) with short response times, ranging
from minutes to a few hours.
Existing ﬂash ﬂood early warning systems typically predict the mere hydrometeorological phenomena (e.g.
discharge at a given river section). However, experience in emergency response management shows that pure
hazard forecasts are difﬁcult to interpret by emergency managers. To estimate the expected consequences and
impacts of a predicted ﬂash ﬂood phenomenon, emergency managers ﬁrst have to combine the hazard forecast
with information about exposure and vulnerability of the area at risk. Given the already short lead time of ﬂash
ﬂoods, this further reduces the available time to coordinate ﬂood response measures, and may lead to sub-optimal
decisions.
We present a newly developed method of rapid ﬂash ﬂood impact forecasting, which combines hazard, exposure
and vulnerability information at near-real time and high resolution. First, the ﬂood extent is predicted by com-
bining hazard forecasts with EU Floods Directive ﬂood maps. Second, this ﬂooded area is overlaid instantly with
exposure and vulnerability layers, such as population density, land use and critical infrastructure. The resulting
impact forecast is presented in quantitative (e.g. number of affected population) and qualitative terms (e.g. impact
level), both spatially distributed and as lumped information at municipality level.
The method is applied in an operational setup in Catalonia, Spain. The Catalan Water Agency and Civil Protection
operationally use the radar-based ﬂash ﬂood hazard forecast system FF-EWS. This hazard forecast is the input for
testing the proposed methodology, and the product is a high-resolution (25x25m) impact forecast for Catalonia.
Its forecasting skill is demonstrated using observed impacts of signiﬁcant ﬂash ﬂood events in recent years.

