Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-3296, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Capturing pre-failure signs of the Maoxian landslide with Sentinel-1
satellites

Emanuele Intrieri (1), Federico Raspini (1), Alﬁo Fumagalli (2), Ping Lu (3), Sara Del Conte (2), Paolo Farina
(4), Jacopo Allievi (2), Alessandro Ferretti (2), and Nicola Casagli (1)
(1) Earth Sciences Department, University of Firenze, Firenze, Italy (federico.raspini@uniﬁ.it), (2) TRE ALTAMIRA, Milano,
Italy , (3) College of Surveying and Geo-Informatics, Tongji University, Shanghai, China, (4) Geoapp s.r.l., Academic Spin-off
of the University of Florence, Firenze, Italy

Post-event InSAR (Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar) analysis on a stack of 45 C-band SAR images
acquired by the ESA Sentinel-1 satellites from 9 October 2014 to 19 June 2017 allowed for the identiﬁcation of
a clear precursory deformation signal for the Maoxian landslide (Mao County, Sichuan Province, China). The
landslide occurred in the early morning of 24 June 2017 and buried 62 houses, killing more than 100 people in the
village of Xinmo. The Maoxian landslide can be classiﬁed as a rock avalanche with an estimated volume of about
18 million m3 and a total area of 1.5 km2. Sentinel-1 images have been processed immediately after the event
using the SqueeSAR technique, an advanced multi-interferogram analysis capable of maximizing the density of
measurement points. Ground deformation maps and displacement time series for an area of 460 km2, straddling
the Minjiang River and its right tributary, the Songping Gully, were generated.
The SqueeSAR algorithm applied to the Sentinel-1 data-stack provided valuable information on ground move-
ments before the event, indicating the presence of some areas affected by surface displacements, likely related to
slope instability phenomena, along the narrow and deep valleys incised by the Minjiang River and the Songping
Gully. SqueeSAR results clearly show the presence of active movements in a large sector of the slope above the
Xinmo village. Here, velocity values range between 10 and 20 mm/yr, with peaks of about -27 mm/yr along the
line of sight of the satellite. Considering the acquisition geometry and the orientation of the slope, the measured
deformation rates are consistent with the occurrence of precursory movements over a large sector of the slope
affected by the 24 June 2017 landslide. It is worth remarking that this speciﬁc sector of the slope was the origin of
the sliding event.
Deformation time series of measurement points identiﬁed within the source area of the landslide exhibit an
acceleration starting from April 2017. A detailed analysis of the time series within the source area led to the
identiﬁcation of at least 3 different sectors characterized by homogeneous kinematic behaviours which can be
grouped in accelerating, linear and stable areas. For the Maoxian landslide, the accelerating areas are located in
the NW sector of the source area.
The Fukuzono method for forecasting the time of failure has been successfully applied to the displacement
data exhibiting progressive acceleration, pointing out that an accurate estimation of the failure time was already
possible since the beginning of June.
These results show for the ﬁrst time that satellite radar data, systematically acquired over large areas with
short revisiting time, could be used not only for mapping unstable areas, but also for actual landslide early
warning, at least for some typologies of sliding phenomena. This means that the transition from historical analysis
of ground deformation to a sort of continuous monitoring at regional scale using satellite radar data is now possible.

