Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13420, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The Odyssey of Ocean Research Drilling: Past and Future Directions

Judith A. McKenzie
Geological Institute/Earth Sciences, ETH, Zürich, Switzerland (sediment@erdw.ethz.ch)

In his article titled “The Past and Future of Ocean Drilling”, which was published as an introduction to a special
volume celebrating the tenth anniversary of scientiﬁc ocean drilling, Roger Revelle (1981) summarized the
principal results achieved by the Deep Sea Drilling Project (DSDP) from 1968-1978. Speciﬁcally, the original
goal of the DSDP was to test the newly evolving plate tectonic/seaﬂoor spreading hypothesis. Through ocean
drilling campaigns using the facilities of the Glomar Challenger, sediment and rock samples were recovered from
beneath the seaﬂoor to provide the direct proof of the hypothesis, and, in fact, the primary goal was amazingly
achieved within the ﬁrst 10 years of ocean drilling.

This major accomplishment was enhanced by additional discoveries, many of which have continued to im-
pact Earth science research during the following 40 years with scientiﬁc ocean drilling programs (DSDP, ODP
and both IODP’s). Three examples of these discoveries will be highlighted in this presentation with the intention
to illustrate how the scientiﬁc drilling of the deep sub-seaﬂoor has evolved and continues to impact our knowledge
of the Earth System. They are: (1) the discovery of the most recent and largely undeformed salt giant deposited
in the Mediterranean basins between 5.96 to 5.33 Ma, (2) the discovery of the enigmatic carbonate mineral
dolomite precipitating in deep-sea sediments from near normal seawater but mediated by the microbial activity
of the deep sub-seaﬂoor biosphere, and (3) the recognition of the presence, via methane sampling, and ultimately
the recovery of intact gas hydrates from deep-sea sediments. Each of these three discoveries continues to drive
scientiﬁc research in new directions, respectively, i.e. with (1) further fundamental exploration in the case of the
Mediterranean massive salt deposits, (2) systematic probing of the nature and extent of the “deep biosphere” and
associated in situ diagenesis, and (3) mapping and evaluation of the extent of the environmental hazard versus
exploitation potential of the methane locked up in gas hydrates, an energy resource frozen solidly into deep-sea
sediments.

In summary, it is often said that, due to the watery veil covering approximately 71% of the Earth, the
ocean ﬂoor has been mapped in far less detail than the surface of Mars, the Moon or Venus. As of this writing,
the ocean drilling programs have drilled and cored slightly more than 1500 deep holes into the ocean ﬂoor, a
meager number compared to the drilling that has been undertaken on the continents. Although major advances
in our knowledge of what lies deeply buried below the seaﬂoor have been made during the ﬁrst 50 years of
ocean research drilling, many of the already recognized phenomena need to be explored and studied in greater
detail. Indeed, it is even highly likely that there are more phenomenon just waiting to be discovered with future
international ocean drilling campaigns.

Revelle, R., 1981, The Past and Future of Ocean Drilling, SEPM Spec. Pulb. No. 32, p. 1-4.

