Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10062-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Analysis of aerosol deposition on snowpack over global high mountain
ranges

Paul Ginoux (1), Sarah Kapnick (1), Sergey Malyshev (1), Veronica Chan (1,2), Huan Guo (1,3), Chris Milly (4),
Vaishali Naik (1), Salvatore Pascale (1,2), Bing Pu (1,2), Elena Shevliakova (1), and Ming Zhao (1)
(1) NOAA-GFDL, Atmospheric Physics, Chemistry, and Climate, Princeton, United States, (2) Atmospheric and Oceanic
Sciences Program, Princeton University, Princeton, United States, (3) UCAR Visiting Scientist Program, Princeton, United
States, (4) Geological Survey, Princeton, United States

Snow and ice over high mountain ranges are often not pure, but contains absorbing aerosols such as black carbon
or dust. These impurities can alter the surface albedo and inﬂuence cryosphere melt dynamics and feed back on
broader circulation. These effects will depend on the intensity of snowfall accumulation and aerosol deposition, as
well as their spatial and temporal distributions.
Here, we present an analysis of a 36-year simulation (1980-2015) with the new Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory (GFDL) atmospheric and land model (AM4-LM4) using the latest CMIP6 inventory of emission of
aerosols, GHGs and other forcing agents, with a 50 km resolution, and nudging of wind components by NCEP
re-analysis. After brieﬂy presenting the evaluation of AM4 performances by comparing precipitation, snow and
aerosol properties with observations, we will discuss the key features of the variability and trends of snow and
aerosol deposition over major mountain ranges in North America (Alaska and Rockies), South America (Andes),
Europe (Alps), and Central (Caucasus) and East (Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Tian Shan, Hengduan, and Himalayas)
Asia.
While most mountain ranges have nearby sources of dust or pollutants, they are rarely collocated. This will
translate into distinct spatial distributions and temporal variations. One important factor is the vertical distribution
of aerosol deposition, which generally does not coincide with maximum snow depth. Regional sources have their
maximum deposition rates on the ﬂank of the mountain with large contribution from dry deposition. Remote
sources will contribute dominantly by wet deposition at higher elevation. We can then classify mountain ranges
where one or both aerosol depositions are in phase or out of phase with the snow accumulation season. Our results
indicate considerable variability of aerosol deposition between mountain ranges, and the importance of taking into
account their spatial and seasonal variability. We are also able to classify high mountain snowpack with signiﬁcant
trends of aerosol deposition since the 1980s. The sign of these trends varies not only between mountain ranges,
but also by aerosol classiﬁcation within a single range, highlighting the importance of regional aerosol-snowpack
assessments.

