Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-12875, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The European Network for the Radar surveillance of Animal Movement
(ENRAM)

Jason Chapman (1), Judy Shamoun-Baranes (2), Adriaan Dokter (3), Hidde Leijnse (4), Felix Liechti (5), Jarmo
Koistinen (6), Cecilia Nilsson (3), Hans van Gasteren (2), José Alves (7), Nir Sapir (8), Ommo Hüppop (9), Don
Reynolds (10), and Silke Bauer (5)
(1) University of Exeter, Centre for Ecology and Conservation, Penryn, UK, (2) University of Amsterdam, Institute for
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, (3) Cornell University, Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY,
USA, (4) Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), R&D Observations and Data Technology, De Bilt,
Netherlands, (5) Swiss Ornithological Institute, Sempach, Switzerland, (6) Finnish Meteorological Institute, Helsinki, Finland,
(7) University of Aveiro, CESAM, Aveiro, Portugal, (8) The University of Haifa, Department of Evolutionary and
Environmental Biology, Haifa, Israel, (9) Institute of Avian Research, Wilhelmshaven, Germany, (10) University of
Greenwich, Natural Resources Institute, Chatham, UK

The aerial migration of animals has an enormous impact on ecosystem services, population dynamics, community
interactions, ﬂight safety, quality of meteorological products derived from weather radar, and the spread of pest
insects and vector-borne diseases. At the same time, it is very challenging to monitor these movements of animals
through the aerospace. A promising recent development has been the use of radars for monitoring the migration
of birds, bats, and insects. However, a coordinated approach that would enable us to combine data from large
numbers of radars was lacking. Filling this gap was the main aim of COST action ES1305: European Network for
the Radar surveillance of Animal Movement (ENRAM).

Within the framework of this COST action, an existing algorithm for deriving bird migration altitude pro-
ﬁles from weather radars was adapted to be used on weather radars from the European operational radar network
OPERA, consisting of ∼200 radars. Bird proﬁles are currently operationally generated for about 70 weather radars
from this network, and this number is increasing.

Measurement campaigns have been set up to compare outputs of several types of dedicated bird- and in-
sect radars at several key migration sites across Europe. For these campaigns, comparisons with the output of the
bird proﬁle algorithm have also been made. This has allowed us to quantify the quality of such dedicated radars in
different circumstances, and to understand the reasons for variations in them. These measurement campaigns have
also been extremely important for validating the weather radar bird proﬁling algorithm.

The larger the number of weather radars for which bird proﬁles are generated, the more challenging it be-
comes to analyze these data. We have therefore invested in visualizing bird migration derived from a network
of weather radars. These visualizations provide insight into migration patterns that would otherwise not be clear
from the data, and are hence extremely important for analyses of such data.

The availability of continental-scale data on bird and insect migration can help answering questions that
could not be addressed without these data.

The synthesis of this COST action is the mapping of an autumn bird migration event across Western Eu-
rope as observed by ∼70 weather radars.

