Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13801, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Pollution tracks in clouds provide direct observational evidence for weak
cloud water response to aerosols

Velle Toll (1), Nicolas Bellouin (1), Matthew Christensen (2), Andrew Gettelman (3), Santiago Gassó (4,5)
(1) Department of Meteorology, University of Reading, Reading, UK (v.toll@reading.ac.uk), (2) Atmospheric, Oceanic and
Planetary Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, (3) National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado,
USA, (4) GESTAR, Morgan State University, Baltimore, MD, USA, (5) Climate and Radiation Laboratory, NASA/GSFC,
Greenbelt, MD, USA

Aerosol-cloud interaction is the most uncertain mechanism of anthropogenic radiative forcing of Earth’s climate,
and aerosol-induced cloud water changes are particularly poorly constrained in climate models. Ship tracks,
linear cloud features in marine stratocumulus clouds impacted by ship emissions, have been long recognized as
real-world experiments of aerosol-cloud interactions. We demonstrate that similar cloud tracks occur in various
type of warm clouds over ocean and land as a response to aerosols from various natural and anthropogenic sources.
Using aerosol-induced tracks in clouds, we compare polluted cloud properties with the properties of the nearby
unpolluted clouds using remote sensing data from MODerate-resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer.

In this research, we extend observations of volcano and ship tracks from Toll et al.
(2017, GRL;
https://doi.org/10.1002/2017GL075280) with observations of industry (oil reﬁneries, smelters etc) and wild-
ﬁre tracks over land. Industry and wildﬁre tracks have been detected on most continents providing a near-global
observational constraint on cloud responses to aerosols together with volcano and ship tracks over oceans. Track
observations suggest that cloud water both increases and decreases in tracks, resulting in weak average cloud water
response. Strong decreases in cloud droplet sizes are seen in all types of tracks. Track observations show that cloud
water increases in precipitating clouds due to suppression of rain. Cloud water decreases in non-precipitating
clouds with dry air above the clouds. The relative humidity dependence of the cloud response suggests that
enhanced entrainment leads to decreased cloud water in non-raining clouds. Preliminary results suggest that the
cloud water tends to decrease more readily over land, partly offsetting the radiative forcing through the ﬁrst
aerosol indirect effect.

Finally, we compare track observations with cloud water responses in the Hadley Centre climate model
and Community Atmosphere Model. In stark contrast to observations, strong systematic cloud water increases
occur in climate models as only aerosol-induced suppression of rain is accounted for in the models. The discrep-
ancy between climate models and track observations suggests that model estimates of radiative forcing through
aerosol-cloud interactions may be overly negative.

