Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10490, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The RAVAN CubeSat mission: overview and results

William Swartz (1), Steven Lorentz (2), and Philip Huang (1)
(1) Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, Maryland, USA (bill.swartz@jhuapl.edu), (2) L-1
Standards and Technology, Manassas, Virginia, USA

The small imbalance between the incident solar irradiance and Earth-leaving ﬂuxes of total and shortwave solar-
reﬂected energy is vital to understanding and predicting climate change. Accurately quantifying the spatial and
temporal variation of Earth’s outgoing energy from space is a challenge—one potentially rendered more tractable
with the advent of multipoint measurements from small satellite or hosted payload constellations. The Radiometer
Assessment using Vertically Aligned Nanotubes (RAVAN) 3U CubeSat, launched November 11, 2016 and still
operating over a year later, is a pathﬁnder for a constellation to measure the Earth’s energy imbalance. Funded
by NASA’s Earth Science Technology Ofﬁce, the objective of RAVAN is to establish that compact, broadband
radiometers calibrated to high accuracy can be built and operated in space for low cost. We present an overview
of the mission and on-orbit results demonstrating RAVAN’s two key technologies. First, we show measurements
of the solar irradiance and Earth’s outgoing energy with radiometers that use vertically aligned carbon nanotube
(VACNT) absorbers. VACNT forests are some of the blackest materials known and have an extremely ﬂat spectral
response over a wide wavelength range. The measurements are made at both shortwave, solar wavelengths and
in the thermal infrared. Second, we show the performance of two gallium phase-change cells that are used to
monitor the degradation of RAVAN’s radiometer sensors. A 3-axis controlled CubeSat bus allows for routine solar
and deep-space attitude maneuvers, which are essential for calibrating RAVAN’s Earth radiation measurements.
RAVAN also demonstrates partnering with a commercial vendor for the CubeSat bus, payload integration and test,
and mission operations. This paradigm has allowed us to focus on technology development essential to the new
Earth measurement.

