Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10961, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Mapping Kneiss islands environment using hyperspectral data

Rim katlane (2), Jean Claude Berges (1), and Fouad Zargouni ()
(1) Paris 1, Geography, PRODIG, Paris, France , (2) Faculté des Sciences de Tunis, Université El-Manar, Tunis, Tunisie

On the eve of PRISMA and EnMap lauching, the EO1/Hyperion data gain new interest. Despite a limited
number of available views this satellite sensor offer a practical testbed to assess the improvements expected from
hyperspectral remote sensing. This presentation focuses on coastal ecosystems mapping through a Kneiss islands
study. These islands, located on the tunisian coast between Sfax and Gabes, are close from the coast and are
surrounded by shallow waters with a signiﬁcant tidal effect. Natural conditions associated with a low level of
human activities made this area a migratory bird sanctuary and therefore led to the classiﬁcation as a protected
Ramsar zone. However the sustainability of this ecosystem in front of environmental and land use changes is an
open issue and the protected area monitoring requires an accurate and repetitive mapping.

On a previous study the retrieval of the main coastal water parameters were extracted from Modis imagery.
The chlorophyll content was estimated by semi-empirical algorithms OC3 and OC5 and these estimations were
compared with in-situ measurements. As some of these measurements are close from EO1/Hyperion this study has
been extended to the hyperspectral case. Two classes of hyperspectral indices are computed. The ﬁrst indices are
directly derived from Modis ones but on narrower bands. The second classe of indices are computed by algorithms
close from the spectral optimization approach as supported by the HOPE processing software. Although the
results are in some extents inconclusive due to small size of the processed sample they shows the importance of
data quality for a proper exploitation of hyperspectral imagery. An alternative way should be to investigate for
hyperspectral methods less sensitive to radiometric of atmospheric perturbations.

