Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-699, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Skilful seasonal forecasts of streamﬂow over Europe?

Louise Arnal (1,2), Hannah Cloke (1,3,4), Elisabeth Stephens (1), Fredrik Wetterhall (2), Christel Prudhomme
(2,5,6), Jessica Neumann (1), Blazej Krzeminski (2), and Florian Pappenberger (2)
(1) University of Reading, Reading, UK (louise.arnal@ecmwf.int), (2) European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts, Reading, UK, (3) Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, (4) Centre of Natural Hazards and Disaster Science,
Uppsala, Sweden, (5) Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK, (6) NERC Centre for Ecology & Hydrology,
Wallingford, UK

While climate-model-based seasonal streamﬂow forecasting experiments are abundant outside of Europe, they
remain limited in this part of the world. This is because, although the skill of seasonal climate forecasts has
increased over the past decades, it is still limited in the extra-tropics. Much effort is being made to increase
the quality of seasonal streamﬂow forecasts worldwide. However, as their quality increases, their usability for
decision-making lags behind. Translating the quality of a forecast into an added value for decision-making and
incorporating new forecasting products into established decision-making chains are not easy tasks.

The European Flood Awareness System (EFAS) is at the forefront of seasonal streamﬂow forecasting, with
one of the ﬁrst operational pan-European seasonal hydrological forecasting systems. We present a Europe-wide
analysis of the skill of the EFAS seasonal streamﬂow hindcasts (produced using ECMWF’s System 4 seasonal
climate hindcasts) benchmarked against the Ensemble Streamﬂow Prediction (ESP) forecasting approach, using a
variety of veriﬁcation scores that cover several forecast attributes (i.e. accuracy, sharpness, reliability and overall
performance) (Arnal et al., in review). Overall, the results show that the seasonal climate forecasts improve the
predictability over historical meteorological information for pan-European seasonal streamﬂow forecasting for
the ﬁrst month of lead time only. However, the predictability varies in space and time and is greater in winter and
autumn. Parts of Europe additionally display a longer predictability, up to seven months of lead time, for certain
target months.

For decision-making, the ability of a seasonal forecasting system to predict above or below normal condi-
tions months ahead is of great value. Our results show that the EFAS seasonal streamﬂow forecasts are more
potentially useful than the ESP for certain seasons and regions, especially in winter for most of Europe.

References

Arnal, L., Cloke, H. L., Stephens, E., Wetterhall, F., Prudhomme, C., Neumann, J., Krzeminski, B., and
Pappenberger, F.: Skilful seasonal forecasts of streamﬂow over Europe?, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. Discuss.,
https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-2017-610, in review, 2017.

