Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10790, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Cassini’s Grand Finale: Highlights from a Voyage into Unique Territory

Linda Spilker and Scott Edgington
Jet Propulsion Laboratory/Caltech, Pasadena, USA (linda.spilker@jpl.nasa.gov)

After 13 years orbiting Saturn and exploring the Saturn system, the Cassini-Huygens mission ended in a science-
rich blaze of glory on September 15, 2017. The Grand Finale and Ring Grazing orbits marked the ﬁnal phase of
Cassini’s mission covering roughly ten months and ending the mission with the ﬁrst time in-situ exploration of the
region between the rings and planet. On its ﬁnal orbit, Cassini plunged into Saturn’s atmosphere, vaporizing and
satisfying planetary protection requirements, while sending back its ﬁnal bits of unique science data.

In late 2016, Cassini’s trajectory transitioned to a series of 20 Ring Grazing orbits with peripases located
within 10000 km of Saturn’s F ring. These orbits provided the high-resolution views of Saturn’s F ring and outer A
ring, and prime viewing conditions for ﬁne scale ring structures such as propellers. They also included the closest
ﬂybys of tiny ring moons, including Pan, Daphnis and Atlas. Plasma and dust composition measurements were
also conducted in this region.

A ﬁnal close ﬂyby of Titan in late April 2017 propelled Cassini across Saturn’s main rings and into its
Grand Finale orbits. Comprised of 22 orbits, the spacecraft repeatedly dove between Saturn’s innermost rings
and upper atmosphere attempting to answer fundamental questions unattainable earlier in the mission. Saturn’s
gravitational ﬁeld was measured to unprecedented accuracy, providing information from which constraints on the
interior structure of the planet, winds in the deep atmosphere, and mass distribution in the rings could be derived.
Probing the magnetic ﬁeld provided insights into the physics of the magnetic dynamo, the structure of the internal
magnetic ﬁeld, and constraints on the location of the metallic hydrogen transition region.

The Grand Finale orbits provided the highest resolution observations ever of both Saturn’s C and D rings
and Saturn’s atmospheric weather layer. Direct in-situ sampling of the ring particle composition and the innermost
radiation belts was also achieved. The ion and neutral mass spectrometer sampled the exosphere and upper
atmosphere for molecules entering and escaping from the atmosphere and water-based molecules originating from
the rings. The cosmic dust analyzer directly sampled the composition of the ring particles from different regions
of the main rings for the ﬁrst time.

The last orbit turned the spacecraft into the ﬁrst Saturn atmosphere probe with all of ﬁelds and particle in-
struments gathering data as long as the spacecraft remained stable. Approximately one additional scale height of
atmosphere was probed prior to loss of the radio signal from the spacecraft.

During this talk, science highlights and new mysteries gleaned from the Ring Grazing and Grand Finale
orbits will be discussed.

The research described in this paper was carried out in part at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California In-
stitute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Copyright 2018
California Institute of Technology. Government sponsorship is acknowledged.

