Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13122, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Predicting the severity of defoliation due to the pine processionary moth
using remote sensing and UAV imagery

Kaori Otsu (1), Magda Pla (2), Lluís Brotons (1,2,3)
(1) Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Centre for Ecological Research and Forestry Applications (CREAF), Spain
(k.otsu@creaf.uab.cat), (2) Forest Science Center of Catalonia (CTFC), (3) Spanish National Research Council (CSIC)

Currently, pest is the principal biotic driver to cause disturbances in Mediterranean forests and may accelerate to
tree mortality in a combination with other biotic factors as well as abiotic factors such as drought, ﬁre, and cli-
mate change. The pine processionary moth (Thaumetopoea pityocampa), one of the major defoliating insects in
Mediterranean forests, has become an increasing threat to the forest health over the past two decades. In a normal
year healthy forest stands recover from defoliations, however, when host trees are stressed by other disturbance
factors severely defoliated stands may not sufﬁciently recover in the following years, resulting in signiﬁcant re-
ductions of forest production and carbon stock. In the case of Catalonia, northeast of Spain, forest health surveys
on T. pityocampa have been conducted annually at the regional scale since 2010. After the recent outbreak of
T. pityocampa observed in 2016, we attempted to estimate the severity of defoliation by comparing pre-outbreak
and post-outbreak images obtained from Landsat 8 to capture the maximum defoliation period over winter. The
difference in vegetation index (dVI) derived from remote sensing was used as a change detection indicator and
was further calibrated with Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) imagery in the study area. The use of UAVs was
incorporated to be the complementary aerial information to the regional forest health surveys for quantifying the
defoliation degree at higher temporal and spatial resolution. In regression analysis, the relationships between pre-
dicted dVIs and observed defoliation degrees by UAV were compared among ﬁve selected dVIs for the coefﬁcient
of determination (R2). Our results showed that the model ﬁtness was highest at 0.081(R2) using Middle Infrared
Wavelengths (MID) or Moisture Stress Index (MSI), which is promising for predicting the severity of defoliation
in affected areas where ground-truth data is limited. This study suggests that the UAV technology holds great
potential for cost-effectively monitoring the current health of forests. In further studies, combining UAV images
with remote sensing data should be considered to validate model predictions of the future forest condition for
developing Ecosystem Services tools.

