Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-5997, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

A Preliminary Study on Estimating the Impact of Plastic Mulched
Landcover on Evapotranspiration Using SEBAL Model

Lizhen Lu (1), Yanlin Huang (1), Liping Di (2), and Yanshen Sun (1)
(1) School of earth sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China (llz_gis@zju.edu.cn), (2) Center for Spatial Information
Science and Systems, George Mason University, Fairfax, U.S.A (ldi@gmu.edu)

Abstract: As one of planting technologies, in recent years signiﬁcant area of cropland has been covered by thin
plastic ﬁlm as the mulch to increase the crop yield. It is expected that the large-scale plastic mulched landcover
(PML) have impacts on evapotranspiration (ET), surface energy balance (SEB), weather, and climate at local,
regional or even continental scale. However, such impacts have been poorly understood so far. In order to
understand the impacts, this study used a surface energy balance algorithm for land (SEBAL) model to compute
the latent heat ﬂux for the plastic mulched cotton area in northern Xinjiang, with Landsat 8 imagery as the main
data source. Based on the latent heat ﬂux with the assumption that evapotranspirative fraction remains constant in
24h, this study derived daily ET for each pixel in the study area. The experimental results showed that daily ET of
PML is about 40% of that of the non-PML vegetated land and in between that of the non-PML vegetated land and
the bare land. Comparing the model derived daily ET with ﬁeld measure, the relative deviation indicated SEBAL
model, to a certain extent, can be used to estimate ET in the PML area. The high relative deviation is most likely
caused by: 1) the assumption of homogeneous surface landcover in SEBAL model, which is not true since PML is
the combination of plastic mulched land, bare land, and/or even vegetation; 2) the uncertainty in “cold” and “hot”
pixel selection; and 3) deviation of model values and true values of surface roughness and other parameters.
Keywords: plastic mulched landcover (PML); evapotranspiration (ET); surface energy balance (SEB); remote
sensing-based estimation; Landsat 8 imagery; Xinjiang

