Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10568, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Regionalizing sensitivity of long-term forecasts over Europe

Louise Crochemore and Ilias Pechlivanidis
SMHI, Hydrology Research Unit, Norrköping, Sweden (louise.crochemore@smhi.se)

Many socio-economic sectors, such as energy production, risk management or tourism, can beneﬁt from hydro-
logic forecasts at monthly to seasonal horizons. An increasing number of hydrologic forecasting systems are
being developed along these lines, for scales ranging from the catchment through to the continental and global
scales. Such forecasts are communicated along with a diagnostic of their performance with the month of the year
and the lead time. The skill of hydrologic forecasts results from and is subject to different sources of uncertainty,
i.e. model structure, parameters, initial conditions and meteorological forcing input. Identifying and quantifying
the sensitivity of forecast systems to these different sources of uncertainty can guide the choice of components
of a forecast system, or more generally foster efforts and investments for a given catchment, such as model
improvements, new data acquisition tools or better meteorological forecasts.

We investigate the relative contributions of initial hydrologic conditions (IHCs) and meteorological forcing
(MF) to the skill of a pan-European seasonal hydrological forecasting system. The end point blending (EPB,
Arnal et al., 2017), a computationally-light version of the variational ensemble streamﬂow prediction assessment
(VESPA, Wood et al., 2016), which provides diagnostics of skill sensitivity to IHC and MF over forecast months
and forecast aggregations, is applied in a set of catchments that are representative of the European hydro-climatic
gradient. For this analysis, four ensembles are produced based on the European version of the HYPE hydrological
model (E-HYPE) for the period 1981-2010. An ensemble based on modelled climatology blends uncertainties
in IHCs and MF, an ensemble based on perfect forecasts without uncertainty from any of the two, Extended
Streamﬂow Prediction (ESP) representing uncertainties in MF, and reverse ESP representing uncertainties in
IHCs. In all analyses, both model state initialisation and provision of climatology are based on forcing input
derived from the WFDEI product, a combination of the ERA-Interim reanalysis and of satellite products.

In a previous study, eleven types of European catchments were identiﬁed in terms of prevailing hydro-
climatic conditions and seasonal forecast skill. Here, the EPB method is applied in 550 basins selected uniformly
within these eleven catchment types. From this analysis, we highlight characteristic patterns in skill sensitivity to
IHCs and MF over Europe, and link these patterns to catchment hydrological features. We also investigate how
and how fast sensitivity in IHCs and MF changes with the lead time. Finally, a regionalization of statistics in
sensitivity patterns is investigated.

Arnal, L., Wood, A. W., Stephens, E., Cloke, H. L. and Pappenberger, F.: An Efﬁcient Approach for Estimating
Streamﬂow Forecast Skill Elasticity, J. Hydrometeorol., 18(6), 1715–1729, doi:10.1175/JHM-D-16-0259.1, 2017.

Wood, A. W., Hopson, T., Newman, A., Brekke, L., Arnold, J. and Clark, M.: Quantifying Streamﬂow
Forecast Skill Elasticity to Initial Condition and Climate Prediction Skill, J. Hydrometeorol., 17(2), 651–668,
doi:10.1175/JHM-D-14-0213.1, 2016.

