Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13293, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Evolution of asymmetrically displaced footpoints during substorms

Anders Ohma (1), Nikolai Østgaard (1), Jone Peter Reistad (1), Paul Tenfjord (1), Karl M. Laundal (1), Kristian
Snekvik (1), and Matthew O. Fillingim (2)
(1) University of Bergen, Birkeland Centre for Space Science, Department of Physics and Technology, Bergen, Norway
(anders.ohma@uib.no), (2) Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA, United States

It is well established that a transverse (y) component in the Interplanetary Magnetic Field (IMF) induces a By
component in the closed magnetosphere through asymmetric loading and/or redistribution of magnetic ﬂux. Simul-
taneous images of the aurora in the two hemispheres have revealed that conjugate auroral features are displaced
longitudinally during such conditions, indicating that the ﬁeld-lines are displaced from their symmetric conﬁgura-
tion. Although the direction and magnitude of this displacement show correlations with IMF clock angle and dipole
tilt, events show large temporal and spatial variability of this displacement. For instance, it is currently unknown
how substorms affect the displacement.
In a previous case study it has been demonstrated that displaced auroral forms, associated with the prevailing IMF
orientation, returned to a more symmetric conﬁguration during the expansion phase of two substorms. Using IM-
AGE and Polar, we have identiﬁed multiple events where conjugate auroral images during substorms are available.
By visual inspection and by applying a correlation analysis, we identify conjugate auroral features and investigate
how the asymmetry evolves during the expansion phase. We ﬁnd that the system returns to a more symmetric state,
in agreement with the earlier published case study. This is also true for the events where the solar wind driving
is stable, indicating that the asymmetric displacement is indeed reduced or removed by the substorm. This can
be interpreted as the result of increased reconnection rate in the magnetotail during the expansion phase, which
reduces the asymmetric lobe pressure.

