Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-4468, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

On the Anthropogenic Origin of Noctilucent Clouds

Franz-Josef Lübken, Uwe Berger, and Gerd Baumgarten
Leibniz Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Kühlungsborn, Germany (luebken@iap-kborn.de)

The MIMAS (Mesospheric Ice Microphysics and Transport) ice model is used to study the trend behavior of
polar mesospheric clouds (PMCs) responding to long-term changes in mesospheric temperatures and water vapor
at northern middle and high latitudes from 1871 until now. The calculated trends in PMC formation are partly
forced by a long-term change in the thermal and compositorial state of the atmospheric background. We estimate
the climate change in the PMC environment using trend studies with our Leibniz-Institute Middle Atmosphere
(LIMA) model. We take into account long-term changes in solar activity and trace gas distributions. Furthermore,
LIMA adapts NOAA CIRES 20thC V2 reanalysis data (20th century) that describes the temporal evolution of
troposphere/lower stratosphere since 1871.
In the past we have concentrated on trends in ice layers mainly for periods after the late 1970s since satellite
observations of background Parameters relevant for our topic are available since then. More recently we have
extended our trend analysis of background temperatures and noctilucent Clouds (NLC) to a longer period, namely
from 1871 to present. We concentrate on the most important drivers for NLC trends, namely carbon dioxide (CO2)
and water vapor (H2O). Since the main increase of these species occurs in the last 40-50 years, NLC parameters
such as occurrence frequency, mean integrated backscatter (IBS), mean altitude, and mean ice water content (IWC)
increase accordingly. First, we will present and discuss long term trends in temperatures and water vapor. To
separate their impact on the long term evolution of NLC, we have performed runs with temperature trends (caused
mainly by increase of CO2) and water vapor trends (caused mainly by increase of CH4) separately. Trends of
NLC parameters are rather small in the ﬁrst couple of decades (namely from 1870 until approximately 1960) and
accelerate signiﬁcantly thereafter. We ﬁnd that the reason for the observed enhancement of NLC brightness in the
last decades is primarily the increase of water vapor, whereas the decrease of temperatures plays a secondary role.
In our presentation we will discuss the implications of our results for the role of NLC as indicators for climate
change.

