Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13502-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Investigating Mercury’s Crustal Magnetic Field

Joana S. Oliveira (1,2) and Lon L. Hood (3)
(1) ESA/ESTEC, SCI-S, Keplerlaan 1, 2200 AG Noordwijk, Netherlands, (2) CITEUC, Geophysical & Astronomical
Observatory, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, (3) Lunar & Planetary Lab, 1629 E. University Blvd., Univ. of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA

The evolution of Mercury in its early stages is still not well known. Core-dynamo models usually predict that the
ﬁeld would be predominantly dipolar with a slow secular variation, with the dipole axis aligned with the rotation
axis. In addition, because of the long cooling time following a basin-forming impact, the strong anomalies within
the Caloris rim are interpreted as implying the existence of a core dynamo at the time when this basin formed. A
valuable data set for investigating crustal magnetism on Mercury was obtained by the NASA MErcury Surface,
Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) Discovery mission during the low-altitude cam-
paign. We obtain altitude normalized maps of the crustal ﬁeld constructed from low-altitude magnetometer data
using an equivalent source dipole technique. Some magnetic anomalies appear to correlate with impact crater/basin
locations, where the strongest anomalies at 40 km altitude have amplitudes of about 8 nT within Caloris, and about
6 nT over Rustaveli and Vyasa. However, many of craters/basins have no associated magnetic anomaly. These
maps suggest that at least some of Mercury’s crustal sources consist of impact melt rocks within impact basins and
in externally deposited ejecta, as has also been inferred from lunar studies. The occurrence of anomalies associated
with only some impact basins/craters is a new observation that will help in constraining impactor or subsurface
target composition. We investigate further these isolated anomalies estimating magnetic paleopole positions, as-
suming that the anomalies are primarily remanent rather than induced. We use a unidirectional equivalent source
dipoles method (also called Parker’s method) to invert for the direction of crustal magnetization associated with
isolated hermean magnetic anomalies. From the direction of magnetization, we calculate the corresponding mag-
netic paleopole position, which corresponds to the north magnetic pole of a predominantly dipolar core-generated
ﬁeld when the anomaly was formed. This method largely bypasses the non-uniqueness associated with specifying
the geometry of the magnetic sources. The only assumption is that when the region acquired a remanent magne-
tization, the main ﬁeld was constant in direction. For the anomalies investigated, the obtained magnetic paleopole
positions within uncertainties are located near the current geographic South pole. Exhaustive investigation of other
magnetic anomalies suitable for inversion will allow to evaluate the impactor composition, true polar wander and
possible core dynamo history.

