Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-18357, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

A Thermal Imaging Instrument with Uncooled Detectors

Alicia Joseph (1), Emily Barrentine (2), and Ari Brown (2)
(1) NASA GSFC, Code 617, Greenbelt, United States (alicia.t.joseph@nasa.gov), (2) NASA GSFC, Code 553, Greenbelt,
United States

The National Research Council’s Committee on Implementation of a Sustained Land Imaging Program has
identiﬁed the inclusion of a thermal imager as critical for both current and future land imaging missions. Such
an imaging instrument operating in two bands located at approximately 11 and 12 microns (for example, in
Landsat 8, and also Landsat 9 when launched) will provide essential information for furthering our hydrologic
understanding at scales of human inﬂuence, and produce ﬁeld-scale moisture information through accurate
retrievals of evapotranspiration (ET). Landsat 9 is slated to recycle the TIRS-2 instrument launched with Landsat
8 that uses cooled quantum well infrared photodetectors (QWIPs) operating at about 43-65 K temperature, hence
requiring expensive and massive cryocooler technology to achieve its required spectral and spatial accuracies.

Our goal is to conceptualize and develop a thermal imaging instrument which leverages recent and immi-
nent technology advances in uncooled detectors. Such detector technology will offer the beneﬁt of greatly reduced
instrument cost, mass, and power at the expense of some acceptable loss in detector sensitivity. It would also
allow a thermal imaging instrument to be ﬁelded on board a low-cost platform, e.g., a CubeSat. This would enable
capitalizing on the greater number of launch opportunities available for launch vehicles.

Sustained and enhanced land imaging is crucial for providing high-quality science data on change in land
use, forest health, crop status, environment, and climate. Accurate satellite mapping of ET at the agricultural ﬁeld
scale (the ﬁnest spatial scale of the environmental processes of interest) requires high-quality thermal data to
produce the corresponding accurate land surface temperature (LST) retrievals used to drive an ET model. Such an
imaging instrument would provide important information on the following: 1) the relationship between land-use
and land/water management practices and water use dynamics; 2) the interconnections between anthropogenic
water management and changes in hydrologic budget at scales of human inﬂuence; and 3) complimentary
ﬁeld-scale moisture values for interpreting coarser resolution datasets.

There is clear need for continuing innovation in thermal remote sensing detector technology. By 2023,
scheduled launch year for Landsat 9, its thermal detector technology will be ﬁfteen years old, and Landsat 8 will
be approaching the end of its useful life. In the near term, ESA’s launch of Sentinel-2, a constellation of two
satellites with multi-spectral imagers, will provide high-resolution imaging in the 443-2190 nm spectral range, but
with no thermal coverage.

Recent advances in uncooled detector technology, by developing novel types of ultrasensitive thermopiles
like doped-silicon thermopiles, offer the prospect of realizing a viable thermal instrument.

We reviewed low-TRL technologies: Vanadium oxide bolometers, Bi-Te thermopile technologies, and doped-Si
thermopiles, a new detector concept developed by our team, then compared them and their potential for improve-
ment to the current leading cooled detector technology for land imaging, QWIPs. We modiﬁed our doped-Si
design to meet TIRs instrument requirements including pixel size and speed. Based on the results of these studies
we decided to pursue doped-Si thermopile technology for development efforts.

