Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-2559, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Estimating temperature of surface components by synergistically
combining optical and thermal radiative transfer models

Joris Timmermans (1,2), Jose Luis Gomez-Dans (2), Wouter Verhoef (3), Christiaan van der Tol (3), Philip Lewis
(2), Nicola Pounder (4), Jon Styles (4), and Pierre Philip Matthieu (5)
(1) Leiden University (LU), Institute of Environmental Sciences (CML), Leiden, the Netherlands, (2) University College
London (UCL), Geography, Oegstgeest, United Kingdom, (3) University of Twente (UT), Water Resources Department,
Enschede, the Netherlands, (4) Assimila Ltd, Reading, United Kingdom, (5) European Space Agency (ESA), Frascat, Italy

To estimate evapotranspiration (ET) from space the accurate retrieval of Surface Temperature and several land
surface parameters (LSP) is of vital importance. This however had lead in the past to a large caveat: namely, the
consistency between the different input parameters. When consistency between input parameters is not considered,
this ignores the fact that that without goodness inputs no decent output can provided. When LSP- dynamics
contradict each other, the output of the model cannot be representative of reality. At present however, the LSPs
used in large scale ET estimations originate from different single-sensor retrieval-approaches and even from
different satellite sensors.

In response, the Earth Observation Land Data Assimilation System (EOLDAS) was developed. EOLDAS
uses a multi-sensor approach to couple different satellite observations/types to radiative transfer models (RTM),
consistently. It is therefore capable of synergistically estimating a variety of LSPs. Considering that ET is most
sensitive to the temperatures of the land surface (components), the goal of this research is to expand EOLDAS to
the thermal domain. This research not only focusses on estimating LST, but also on retrieving (soil/vegetation,
Sunlit/shaded) component temperatures, to facilitate dual/quad-source ET models.

To achieve this, The Soil Canopy Observations of Photosynthesis and Energy (SCOPE) model was integrated into
EOLDAS. SCOPE couples key-parameters to key-processes, such as photosynthesis, ET and optical/thermal RT.
In this research SCOPE was also coupled to MODTRAN RTM, in order estimate BOA component temperatures
directly from TOA observations. This paper presents the main modelling steps of integrating these complex models
into an operational platform. In addition it highlights the actual retrieval using different satellite observations, such
as MODIS and Sentinel-3, and meteorological variables from the ERA-Interim.

