Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-17384-2, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Climatology of the surface energy balance over the Metropolitan Area of
Rio de Janeiro (MARJ) based on remote sensing data

Vitor Miranda (1), Leonardo Peres (1,2), and Andrews Lucena (3)
(1) Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Institute of Geosciences (IGEO), Department of Meteorology, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil (vitormiranda91@yahoo.com.br; leonardo.peres@igeo.ufrj.br), (2) Portuguese Institute for Sea and
Atmosphere (IPMA), Lisbon, Portugal, (3) Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRRJ), Institute of Agronomy (IA),
Department of Geosciences, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (lucenageo@yahoo.com.br)

The knowledge of the energy balance is fundamental to understanding the urban heat island (UHI) phenomenon and
urban thermal behavior. As urban materials have different thermal capacities and conductivities they can remove
surface water and change the natural drainage networks. The net effect is a modiﬁcation in radiative, thermal,
aerodynamic and moisture of the preexisting surface features, changing the heat ﬂuxes regimes and humidity. The
development of the Metropolitan Area of Rio de Janeiro (MARJ) was very fast in the past few years becoming one
of the megacities of the world and increasing the need to understand the implications of urbanization on different
environmental parameters as there is an energy balance intensiﬁcation associated with the urbanization increase.
However, the energy balance components are not easily obtained in large areas, as they are measured by expensive
and often private sensors, which do not cover all existing surface types. An alternative means to these sensors is
the use of remote sensing as a tool to obtain the net radiation (Rn) and the sensible (H) and latent (LE) heat ﬂuxes.
In this context, the aim of this work is to study UHI in MARJ based on the analysis of Rn, H and LE and land-use
patterns retrieved from Landsat data covering a 32-year period between 1984 and 2015. The different heat ﬂuxes
were obtained based on Surface Energy Balance Algorithm for Land (SEBAL) whereas land cover maps were
produced in the Ecognition 8.9 software to characterize the heat ﬂuxes in the “urban”, “rural/urban low density”
and “vegetation” classes. Climatology of Rn, H and LE were constructed for MARJ and a monthly analysis was
performed. UHI intensity, based on Rn, H and LE, between “urban”, “rural/urban low density” and “vegetation”
areas was established for each month. The joint analysis of the land-use maps and Rn, H and LE have shown
that 1) “urban” and “vegetation” classes always present the highest (lowest) and lowest (highest) H (LE) values,
respectively. The H (LE) of “rural or urban low density” is high (low), but always in between the “urban” and
“vegetation” ones, representing a transition area involving rural and urban landscapes; and 2) Rn, H and LE were
higher in the summer months and the differences between “urban” and “vegetation” classes are more intense for
these months.

