Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-1932, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Winter Weather - Probabilistic Nowcasting to increase airport safety and
capacity

Harri Haukka (1), Ari-Matti Harri (1), Rudolf Kaltenboeck (2), Martin Hagen (3), Elena Saltikoff (1), Seppo
Pulkkinen (1), Heikki Juntti (1), Herbert Pumpel (2), Martin Steinheimer (2), Kari Österberg (1), Annakaisa von
Lerber (1), Harri Hohti (1), Tarja Riihisaari (1), Jaakko Nuottokari (1), Markus Peura (1), and Aulikki Lehkonen
(1)
(1) Finnish Meteorological Institute, Helsinki, Finland (harri.haukka@fmi.ﬁ), (2) Austro Control, Austria, (3) Deutsches
Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR), Germany

Abstract
We describe the intermediate results of a SJU/EU -funded research activity, called Probabilistic Nowcasting of
Winter Weather for Airports (PNOWWA), developing methods to support the Air Trafﬁc Management (ATM)
challenged by winter weather. Our methodology is based on probabilistic nowcasting of winter weather, which will
enable the estimation of winter weather conditions affecting the ground part of air trafﬁc 4D trajectories. This kind
of ATM methods and tools are called for, because the uncertainties during ﬂight, departure and arrival at airports
create a need to effectively utilize probability forecasts, both in the local operational user environment and en-route.

PNOWWA research work
The PNOWWA project has following work package structure:
- Management
- Probabilistic winter weather prediction
- Winter weather forcing
- Assessment of the potential of the ATM tools and roadmap generation
- Tools enhancing meteorological support for ATM decision making process
- Demonstrators and data dissemination
- SESAR2020 interaction and outreach

PNOWWA will demonstrate very short-term (0-3h, "nowcast") probabilistic winter weather forecasts in
15min time resolution based on an extrapolation of movement of weather radar echoes and improve predictability
of changes in snowfall intensity caused by underlying terrain (such as mountains and seas). Research demonstra-
tions are conducted both ofﬂine and online at the Operative User Environment (OUE) site representing inﬂuence
of the underlying terrain to forecast accuracy. An extensive user consultation will analyze needs to ensure products
are suitable to be integrated in various applications on the ATM side. The adjustment to user needs will cover
the most relevant parameters (visibility, intensity and snow depth) and operationally important thresholds of the
selected parameters (e.g. heavy snowfall).

Links to other related activities
The PNOWWA project has linkages to completed work in ongoing EU SESAR1 program, where FMI developed
Step 1 (Time Based Operations) winter weather solutions based on deterministic forecasts to local OUE. The
initial concept of short-range snowfall forecasts improvement with usage of weather radar has been validated
in that context, and the second phase solutions (Step 2: Trajectory-based Operations) will be developed in EU
SESAR 2020 program. The PNOWWA project will develop the methods for deducing probability forecasts of
winter weather required by SESAR 2020. PNOWWA project will also deliver a roadmap towards implementation
with connection points in future SESAR projects.

