Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-9071-2, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Numerical modeling of observed fast streams in the solar wind – plasma
instabilities and energy exchange between ﬁelds and particles

Yana Maneva (1), Roberto Bruno (2), Daniele Telloni (3), and Stefaan Poedts (1)
(1) KU Leuven, CmPA, Wiskunde, Heverlee, Belgium, (2) Institute for Space Astrophysics and Planetology IAPS, Rome,
Italy, (3) National Institute of Astrophysics ONAF, Astrophysical Observatory, Turin, Italy

Collisionless fast solar wind streams comprise of ubiquitous electromagnetic ﬂuctuations and highly non-
equilibrium electrons and ions, whose distributions exhibit various non-thermal features, such as faster ﬁeld aligned
beams, temperature anisotropies and relative drifts between the multiple ion populations. The nature of these ki-
netic features, their origin and the inter-relation with the ambient electromagnetic ﬁelds and ﬂuctuations are still
open problems which need to be better understood. In this work we perform series of 2.5D hybrid simulations
with ﬂuid electrons and kinetic ions to study the in situ heating and particle acceleration by local ﬂuctuations, such
as plasma waves. We also consider the particle heating and acceleration by small-scale spatial structures, such as
locally generated current sheets. We initialize the system with a set of ion-cyclotron and kinetic Alfven waves.
The latter ﬂuctuations co-exist with self-generated small-scale turbulent current sheets in an anisotropic drifting
proton-alpha particles plasma. We investigate the nonlinear evolution of the modeled observed fast stream parcels
and follow the relaxation of the initial ion temperature anisotropies and relative drifts and their interaction with the
plasma oscillations and the small-scale currents. We test the predicted linear evolution of the ion-cyclotron plasma
micro-instability in the case of initially larger perpendicular temperature for the protons and determine the nonlin-
ear time-scales. Further, we follow the dissipation of the imposed spectra of magnetic ﬂuctuations and study the
related ﬁeld-particle correlations and the energy transfer between the multiple ion species. In all cases we observe
preferential heating for the minor ions, while the protons cool off in perpendicular direction.

