Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13953, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Unexpected observation of emission of subglacial methane to the
atmosphere

Jesper Christiansen and Christian Juncher Jørgensen
University of Copenhagen, Department of Geoscience and Natural Resource Management, Frederiksberg C, Denmark
(jrc@ign.ku.dk)

During an expedition to the Kangerlussuaq area in West Greenland we measured consistently elevated methane
(CH4) concentrations in the air expelled with the meltwater at a subglacial discharge point. The CH4 concentra-
tions in the subglacial air were 3 – 15 times higher than the atmospheric background concentration indicating a
substantial emission of subglacial CH4 to the atmosphere. The release mechanism of the subglacial CH4 to the
atmosphere is currently unknown, but the association with active subglacial meltwater discharge suggests a melt-
water driven transport from the subglacial environment.
The subglacial environments below glaciers and continental ice sheets are home to carbon cycling microbial com-
munities which can both produce and consume CH4. It has also been suggested that reservoirs of CH4 clathrates
may accumulate under the right combination of subglacial temperature and pressure. Until now direct emission of
subglacial emission to the atmosphere has been proved. Our unexpected and striking measurements of direct sub-
glacial CH4 emission point towards an unknown and unconstrained coupling between subglacial methane-cycling
and atmosphere, with possible implications for the atmospheric concentration of CH4.
The potential signiﬁcance of this new discovery is related to a number of critical questions concerning the climatic
impact of atmospheric CH4 in a future changing climate. With documentation of CH4 cycling below glaciers and
ice sheets across the globe, the question is whether the emission of subglacial methane is occurring throughout
Earths glaciated regions or isolated to local subglacial carbon hotspots? Also, will the emissions of subglacial CH4
accelerate in response to with increased surface melt and glacial retreat in a future warmer climate?

