Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-3033, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Lessons Learned from Establishing a City-wide Groundwater
Temperature Observatory

Ashley M Patton (1), Gareth J Farr (1), David P Boon (1), David R James (2), and Bernard Williams (2)
(1) British Geological Survey, Cardiff, United Kingdom (ashleyp@bgs.ac.uk), (2) Cardiff Harbour Authority, Cardiff, United
Kingdom

Climate change has forced governments to adopt targets to reduce CO2 emissions. To achieve this, novel
approaches to energy production are needed. One such technology being explored across Europe is ground source
heating. It is well known that shallow groundwater under cities is thermally enhanced by the Urban Heat Island
effect and that this could prove a resource for ground source heating, but what is not well understood are the
effects that long-term, mass-uptake of heat extraction could have at a city-wide scale.

In Cardiff, UK, the British Geological Survey has been working with the local authority since 2014 to ex-
amine the sustainable use of shallow geothermal energy. A city-wide observatory was established to characterise
spatial and temporal changes within groundwater temperature, comprising 99 in situ sensors installed at discrete
depths in 62 boreholes; the ﬁrst high resolution, city-wide groundwater temperature network in the UK. The
aim of the Cardiff observatory is to characterise baseline groundwater temperatures and the potential geothermal
resource, as a tool to aid developers, planners and regulators in the sustainable development of the subsurface.
Data also provides insight into subsurface processes and geotechnical properties, and is currently being utilised in
a host of projects from research into seasonal ﬂuctuation of groundwater temperatures to 3D geological modelling.
The network also monitors the effects of a shallow, open-loop ground source heat pump on the aquifer at a test
site installation.

A discussion of the signiﬁcance of this observatory is presented including how the geographical extent was
delineated and how sites were chosen from a pre-existing groundwater level monitoring scheme, as well as factors
for consideration on downsizing the network to make it efﬁcient to manage into the future. The advantages and
disadvantages of a range of approaches towards recording, processing and disseminating data are considered, the
merits of open-source data portals explored and experience of different monitoring infrastructure shared. We hope
these lessons can be upscaled to other cities and support development of new groundwater observatories.

