Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-19461, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Inﬂuence of climate variability on the forage production of a permanent
grassland in the French Central Massif

Iñigo Gómara (1), Gianni Bellocchi (2), Raphaël Martin (2), and Margarita Ruiz-Ramos (1)
(1) Research Centre for the Management of Agricultural and Environmental Risks (CEIGRAM), Universidad Politécnica de
Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain, (2) UCA, INRA, VetAgro Sup, Unité Mixte de Recherche sur Écosystème Prairial (UREP),
63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France

Calibrated for the conditions of the French Central Massif (site of Laqueuille), the grassland model PaSim (Pasture
Simulation model) was used to simulate, for the period 1959-2015, the forage production of a mown grassland
system under optimal management conditions, with hourly meteorological inputs extracted from the SAFRAN
atmospheric database (8-km resolution). The aim was to generate purely climate-dependent time series of forage
production. An extended analysis of the relationships between interannual forage yield variability and monthly
climatic anomalies indicates that the highest forage production tends to be associated with brighter (enhanced
incident solar radiation), colder and less humid weather conditions occurring during late-spring and early-summer
(from May to July), and vice versa. SAFRAN and NCEP/NCAR re-analyses suggest that these seasonal climatic
anomalies, observed locally, may be part of an anomalous large-scale atmospheric pattern characterized by
positive (anticyclonic) surface pressure anomalies over the eastern north Atlantic and negative (cyclonic) pressure
anomalies south of Scandinavia. Such anomalous atmospheric conﬁguration obstructs the passage of
weather fronts (accompanied by cloudiness) over Western Europe and promotes the advection of cold/dry Arctic
air over large parts of France. Overall, when simulated under optimum conditions, harvest yield values appear
closely linked with these climatic anomalies, which tend to appear a few months in advance. This study supports
the establishment of predictions of seasonal forage production in the French Central Massif, making use of reliable
predictions of these climatic anomalies and projections of their frequency and intensity under future climate.

Acknowledgments: MACSUR - Modeling European Agriculture with Climate Change for food Security
(FACCE-JPI) funded by Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), Juan de
la Cierva Fellowships (Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness) and the meta-programme ACCAF
(Adaptation of agriculture and forests to climate change) of the French National Institute for Agricultural Research
(INRA).

