Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-19663, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

How much can atmospheric data tell us about the North American land
sink?

Sha Feng, Thomas Lauvaux, Klaus Keller, Martha Butler, Kenneth Davis, Andrew Schuh, Andrew Jacobson,
Sourish Basu, David Baker, Junjie Liu, Chris Williams, Yu Zhou, Liza Diaz-Isaac, Tom Oda, Kevin Gurney, and
Arlyn Andrews

Global terrestrial vegetation plays a critical role in climate projections which highly depends on its response to
rising CO2 concentrations (e.g. fertilization effect), land use change, and climate change. The global terrestrial
sink has kept pace with fossil fuel emissions showing an amazing resiliency to offset continuous growth in
anthropogenic CO2 emissions. As part of the northern mid-latitudes, North American ecosystems are assumed to
play a major role globally while emissions from fossil fuel consumption and land use change reach unprecedented
levels. Both bottom-up and top-down approaches have been used to constrain terrestrial carbon budgets, but
uncertainties remain too large to characterize the drivers of the North American carbon sink. The mechanisms
driving the long-term trend in carbon uptake remain highly uncertain, limiting our ability to implement successful
national-scale climate mitigation policies.

Here we have used a newly-developed ensemble-based mesoscale modeling system to objectively quantify
the uncertainties from ﬂuxes, transport, fossil fuel, and boundary conditions on simulated atmospheric CO2
concentrations. We demonstrate that large uncertainties in seasonal CO2 ﬂuxes from terrestrial vegetation models
can be evaluated, relative to uncertainty in atmospheric transport, using atmospheric data over North America.
Despite errors arising from the boundary conditions, transport models, and fossil fuel emissions, atmospheric data
sheds light on the severe under-sampling of biogenic ﬂux uncertainties at various time scales. Our results demon-
strate the potential from regional atmospheric modeling systems to improve the phenology and climate response
of the terrestrial biosphere to climate anomalies and in turn provide more accurate estimates of carbon sinks
at national to continental scales. The incorporation of atmospheric measurements in regional atmospheric sys-
tems has the potential to provide an independent assessment of annual changes in nationally reported carbon stocks.

