Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-14423, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

An airborne observatory for land surface temperature and
evapotranspiration

Martin Schlerf (1), Kanishka Mallick (1), Max Gerhards (2), Kim Fischer (2), Martin Chamberland (3), Franz
Ronellenﬁtsch (1), and Thomas Udelhoven (2)
(1) Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Luxembourg, (2) Trier University, Germany, (3) Telops, Canada

Thermal infrared (TIR) remote sensing can provide useful measurements of surface temperatures and surface
energy ﬂuxes which are of prime interest for many applications. However, in landscape ecological studies the
use of TIR remote sensing data has been limited mainly by the availability of high spatial resolution TIR remote
sensing data and a limited understanding of these data and associated difﬁculties in processing them into useful
information.

In this paper we introduce the Luxembourg Airborne Observatory System (LAOS) that has been developed
to facilitate at the landscape scale (100-1000 km2) ﬂexible TIR image acquisition and accurate retrieval of
land surface temperature (LST) and parameterisation independent estimation of evapotranspiration (ET). LAOS
consists of a thermal hyperspectral camera (Telops Hyper-Cam LW) and an airborne observation platform operated
from a third party aircraft (twin-engine Cessna T303). The data pre-processing scheme includes generation of
radiance images from the raw FT-data and orthophoto mosaic generation. The science data ﬂow comprises LST
retrieval through dedicated temperature-emissivity separation scheme and ET estimation through the STIC1.2
model (Surface Temperature Initiated Closure, Mallick et al. 2014, 2015, 2016).

Until know, LAOS has been tested over grassland, agriculture and forest ecosystems in Luxembourg, Bel-
gium, Italy and Poland. Examples of TIR-image based LST and ET retrieval results in comparison to collected
ground data are discussed for two sites.

