Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-14018, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Arctic climate responses to mid-latitude aerosol emissions: Combining
modelling and observational evidence to identify critical processes

Tanja Nina Dallaﬁor (1), Srinath Krishnan (2), Anna Lewinschal (2), Ilona Riipinen (1), Hans Christen Hansson
(1), and Annica M. L. Ekman (2)
(1) Stockholm University, Department of Environmental Science and Analytical Chemistry, ACES, Sweden, (2) Stockholm
University, Department of Meteorology, MISU, Sweden

Previous studies using the Earth system model NorESM have shown that changes in aerosol particle emissions
in various geographical regions in the northern mid-latidtudes result in signiﬁcant temperature responses in the
Arctic, which are ampliﬁed compared to the global mean.

We aim to understand what triggers these polar temperature responses and which processes amplify the
initial response. Here, we present results from the ﬁrst part of this work, namely model evaluation in the Arctic
region. The goal of this analysis is to identify critical processes driving the Arctic climate response in NorESM to
mid-latitude aerosol emission changes. To this end, we use new observational datasets, both remote and in-situ, of
aerosol size distribution, cloud fraction, aerosol optical depth, surface radiative ﬂuxes.

Preliminary results show that Arctic sea ice trends are much weaker in the modelling framework compared
to observations. Modelled cloud fractions are higher than observed, especially at lower altitudes. This is in line
with a tendency to lower surface solar radiation in the model output compared to observations at numerous sites
throughout the Arctic region. There are indications that in NorESM, lower-latitude aerosol particles reach the
Arctic region predominantly through the free troposphere, which is not substantiated by remote observations
of aerosol extinction. Total aerosol number concentrations in NorESM1 are in good agreement with in-situ
observations at ﬁve surface sites, but particle sizes are smaller than observed, especially during winter.

Our ﬁndings suggest that aerosol sizes in the Arctic are underestimated compared to observations, in par-
ticular during winter months, and thus that aerosol activation and subsequent indirect aerosol effects in the
Arctic in NorESM1 might be larger than one would expect from observed size distributions. This result also has
implications for the Arctic surface energy balance, which may directly impact sea ice extent. The Arctic surface
energy balance was identiﬁed as linearly related to the magnitude of Arctic ampliﬁcation in various CMIP5 models.

