Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-15052, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

ALBIS: integrated system for risk-based surveillance of invasive mosquito
Aedes albopictus

Massimiliano Cannata, Milan Antonovic, Laura Azzimonti, Andrea Danani, Damiana Ravasi, and Mauro Tonolla
SUPSI, University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland, Manno, Switzerland
(massimiliano.cannata@supsi.ch)

The continuous expansion of invasive Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus, combined to its ability to transmit
arboviruses (e.g. dengue, chikungunya) is raising major public health concern in Europe. Furthermore, there
is a real risk that this mosquito will colonize also urban areas North of the Alps in the next years. In fact, the
spatial distribution and colonization of new areas by invasive mosquito species Ae. albopictus depends on several
environmental parameters, such as winter and summer temperatures, and precipitation patterns. A key factor for
Ae. albopictus to establish at higher latitudes is the capability to develop cold-tolerant overwintering diapausing
eggs under speciﬁc environmental conditions. Weather-driven abundance models are used to map the areas
of potential distribution and to predict temporal dynamics of Ae. albopictus and the transmission potential of
arboviruses.

In Switzerland, Ae. albopictus can reach the North of the Alps exploiting the trafﬁc crossing the country,
in particular, the A2 motorway connecting Southern Europe to Northern Europe. According to predictions based
on a climate-driven large-scale model, the Lake of Geneva and, to some extent, the Swiss Plateau are suitable for
the spread of Ae. albopictus North of the Alps, while other areas in Switzerland (e.g., the city of Zurich) seem
currently too cold in winter for the survival of eggs.
However, this model is based on remotely sensed temperature data and does not take into account the particular
climatic conditions existing in urban settings, where the species thrives. The presence of urban heat islands and the
milder winter conditions of urban microhabitats may increase the probability of diapausing eggs to overwinter and
favour even more the colonization of new cities. Preliminary data collected during the 2016-2017 winter season
in Canton Ticino and the cities of Basel, Zurich and Geneva show that temperatures in typical breeding sites (i.e.
catch basins) are higher compared to external controls and exceed the thresholds for survival of diapausing eggs.

There is therefore an urgent need for appropriate monitoring tools and risk-based surveillance of Ae. Al-
bopictus populations. This project aims to bring a shift of paradigm in data analysis and monitoring of Ae.
albopictus by making data collection and analysis more automated, more dynamic and efﬁcient.
This contribution present the designed system that integrates: istSOS an OGC Sensor Observation Service
server implementation with a user friendly interface and rich feature collection to easily manage your sensor
network and distribute your data in a standard way (www.istsos.org); low-cost and on-line IoT sensors to monitor
temperature, humidity and light; biological data from in-situ specimen; adaptive predictive models of species
based on monitoring data; and graphical interfaces to support the decision making and policy design.

This outcome can only be achieved through the integration of multidisciplinary aspects such as mosquito
surveillance expertise, environmental monitoring system and population modelling. This shift is critical in order
to support the activities of the newly created Swiss National Coordination Center for the Monitoring and Control
of Invasive Mosquitoes, managed by LMA (SUPSI).

