Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-11215, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Multi-year Predictability of Total Soil Water, Drought, and Wildﬁre over
the Globe

June-Yi Lee (1,2), Axel Timmermann (1), and Yoshimitsu Chikamoto (3)
(1) Pusan National University, IBS Center for Climate Physics (ICCP), Busan, Korea, Republic Of (juneyi@pusan.ac.kr), (2)
Research Center for Climate Sciences and Department of Climate System, Pusan National University, Busan, Korea, Republic
Of, (3) Department of Plants, Soils and Climate, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, USA

Severe drought and increased chance in wildﬁre occurrence have signiﬁcant impacts to a wide range of sectors
such as agriculture, energy, food security, forestry, drinking water, and tourism. This study aims to assess multi-
year predictability and prediction skill for total soil water, drought, and wildﬁre occurrence over the Globe using a
multi-year dynamical prediction system based on the Community Earth System Model version 1.0.3 and to better
understand sources of their predictability. We demonstrate that the dynamical prediction system has a high degree
of skill in forecasting total soil water, drought, and wildﬁre probabilities up to 2∼4-year lead time over many
parts of the Globe including the southern part of North and South America, Central America, the northern part of
South Africa, Maritime Continents, Europe and Asia. The important sources of multi-year predictability identiﬁed
in the study include the Trans-basin variability (TBV) between the Atlantic and Paciﬁc sea surface temperature
(SST), the low-pass ﬁltering characteristics of soils, and anthropogenic radiative forcing. In particular, the positive
phase of TBV, characterized by the relatively warmer SST over the Atlantic than the Paciﬁc, is favorable for less
precipitation, less soil water, drought, and more wildﬁre occurrence over the southern part of North and South
America, the northern part of South Africa and many parts of Europe and Asia. However, the opposite condition
tends to prevail in Central America, the southern part of South Africa and the Maritime Continent. The multi-year
predictability of drought and wildﬁre occurrence can be utilized for Humanitarian Crisis Management.

