Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-16038, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Creating of topoclimatic map of High Arctic region (Forlandsundet
region, NW Svalbard) by verifying the theoretical approach using thermal
satellite images

Patrycja Ulandowska-Monarcha (1), Alfred Stach (2), and Rajmund Przybylak (1)
(1) Nicolaus Copernicus University, Faculty of Earth Sciences, Department of Meteorology and Climatology, Poland
(patrycja.mona@gmail.com), (2) Institute of Geoecology and Geoinformation, Adam Mickiewicz University, Pozna´n, Poland,
frdstach@amu.edu.pl

As is known the Arctic is more sensitive to climate change than others regions around the world. Resolution of
both global and regional climatic models is so small that the variability of local climatic conditions is ignored. On
Svalbard this variability is high, mainly because of terrain relief, lithology and land cover. Up to now, topoclimatic
conditions is mainly evaluated by combining point, meteorological measurements data series with theoretical ap-
proach based on estimation of heat balance of active surface. High terrain variability and relatively short series of
observations on small number of measurements sites does not give an opportunity to verify theoretical assumptions
completely. In this study, we would like to present a new, comprehensive approach to creating of topoclimatic maps
on Spitsbergen by combining theoretical approach with empirical data from point meteorological measurements
and thermal satellite images.
Work has been carried out for two areas: Kafﬁøyra located on the west coast of Oscar II Land, and the middle part
of Prins Karls Forland island. In those two regions, a grid of air temperature and humidity measurement sites are
located. Kafﬁøyra region (129.7 km2) covers extensive coastal plain and six alpine type glaciers ﬁlling mountain
valleys. Glaciers and permanent snow patches covers 45% of total area and maximum altitude reaches 936 m a.s.l.
In Prins Karls Forland region (135.4 km2) ice cover encompasses only 13% of area and maximum altitude is 702
m a.s.l. In the axial part of the elongated island runs a mountain chain cut by a valley connecting its two banks.
Method presented in this study combines theoretical and empirical approaches. The source data for theoretical
approach was Digital Elevation Model of Forlandsundet region with 5 m resolution, vector map of the coast-
line, glaciers range, frontal moraines, etc., digitalized geological map, land cover and vegetation raster maps and
interpretation of modern Santinel-2A satellite images with 10/20 m resolution. Topoclimatic units have been distin-
guished by generalization of unique combination of terrain slope and aspect, windward/leeward location, substrate
types and humidity, land cover and classes of direct and diffuse radiation sums.
On the other hand, an empirical approach was used. In this case remote sensing land surface temperature data
(LST) has been main source of data. Landsat (5, 7 and 8) and Terra/ASTER satellites images with thermal infrared
measurements (1985-2017) have been used. For the interval of 33 years, for each of the studied areas, more than
50 thermal images were acquired from the period of the whole polar day. Air temperature and humidity data from
NCU sites net from 2010 – 2015 periods were also employed. The last source of data was calendar of circulation
types to evaluate temporal representativeness of remote sensing data.
LST data have been converted into relative deviations from the average for individual areas and then standardized.
In the next step, the PCA method was used to distinguish types of LST spatial distributions in the studied areas.
Finally, a comparative analysis of LST spatial distributions with the "theoretical" topoclimatic units was carried
out.

