Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10237, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Designing the Climate Observing System of the Future

Bruce Wielicki (1), Elizabeth Weatherhead (2), and Venkatachalam Ramaswamy (3)
(1) NASA Langley, Hampon, VA, United States (b.a.wielicki@nasa.gov), (2) University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, United
States (betsy.weatherhead@colorado.edu), (3) NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Princeton, NJ, United States (
v.ramaswamy@noaa.gov)

Climate observations remain a serious challenge for current and future Earth observations. The number of
essential climate variables to measure and monitor is ∼ 50, about 10 times the number for weather observations.
Observing the critical small decadal changes in those variables commonly requires 10 times the accuracy of
weather observations. Maintaining very high accuracy continuous global observations over many decades provides
a third challenge. As a result, the world lacks a designed, complete, and rigorous climate observing system. Such
a system would include global long term high accuracy monitoring of the 50 essential climate variables, as well as
much more detailed observations of poorly understood climate processes such as aerosols, clouds, carbon cycle,
ocean and ice sheet dynamics. It would provide independent observations to allow conﬁrmation of surprising
results and independent analysis to discover and resolve observational system shortcomings. While progress has
been made (e.g. WCRP GCOS, NASA Earth Observing System, Copernicus) very serious shortcomings remain
(Trenberth et al. 2013).

Given the magnitude of the task, what is the appropriate level of investment? What would the economic
value of such a system be? Recent estimates based on narrowing uncertainty in climate sensitivity suggest a value
of $10 to $20 Trillion U.S. dollars in net present value at a typical discount rate of 3%. The cost to provide such
an advanced climate observing system might require tripling current investments of $4 Billion per year, for 30
years or longer. But compared to its value, such an observing system would provide a return on investment of
50:1 to 100:1, much higher than typical societal investments. How would such a system be designed? Several
concepts have recently been suggested including the use of Quantiﬁed Science Objectives based on key IPCC
uncertainties, climate model and process model Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs) to improve
the understanding of the relationship between observations and their ability to achieve a quantiﬁed science
objective, and the required Quality of the observation especially for rigorous monitoring of critical long term
trends (NASEM 2015, 2018). These concepts are in addition to traditional use of measures of technical readiness,
risk, and cost.

The need, value, and methods for designing such an observing system have been described in a recently
published paper (Weatherhead et al. 2017, AGU Earth’s Future). This presentation will summarize that paper as
well as interpret the need in terms of the recent U.S. Academy of Sciences Decadal Survey released in January
2018. The Decadal Survey set of quantiﬁed climate science objectives allows a measure of how short we remain
of the required observations. In most cases, the technology exists, but the resources to apply it do not. How do
climate scientists better communicate this need to society as well as the large return on investment it represents?
What is the right amount to invest? The goal of this paper is to prompt such discussion.

