Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-8401, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Increasing the contribution of satellite gravity ﬁeld missions to the
investigation of the thermosphere-ionosphere

Eelco Doornbos (1), Claudia Stolle (2), Martin Rother (2), Gang Lu (3), Brian Anderson (4), Tim Visser (1), Jose
van den IJssel (1), Pieter Visser (1), Bjorn Frommknecht (5), and Fabrice Cipriani (6)
(1) Delft University of Technology, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, Space Engineering, Delft, Netherlands
(e.n.doornbos@tudelft.nl), (2) Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, TU Delft, Delft, The Netherlands
(e.n.doornbos@tudelft.nl), (3) High Altitude Observatory, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado,
USA, (4) The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, Maryland, USA, (5) ESA/ESRIN, Frascati, Italy,
(6) ESA/ESTEC Noordwijk, The Netherlands

Satellite gravity ﬁeld missions, such as CHAMP, GRACE, GOCE and GRACE-FO, are designed to make
extremely accurate measurements in low Earth orbit of the (relative) motion of satellites, and proof masses inside
these satellites, in order to infer information on the Earth’s gravity ﬁeld. There are several mechanisms through
which the thermosphere and ionosphere inﬂuence the way in which this motion is measured. The accelerometers,
drag-free control system, dual-frequency radio-tracking systems, star cameras and magnetometers that are
part of the payloads and platforms of the satellites, are to some extent also devices for active space weather
monitoring. The space weather observations, which are considered an error source to be mitigated for the primary
goal of gravity ﬁeld determination, are a valuable source of information for studies of the thermosphere-ionosphere.

For nearly two decades now, data from the accelerometers on board these gravity ﬁeld missions have had a
very large impact on studies of the thermosphere density and horizontal neutral wind. Accurate information
on ionospheric electron content has been derived from dual-frequency satellite-to-satellite tracking systems
as well. More recent developments are the derivation of vertical neutral wind from GOCE acceleration data
and the calibration of platform magnetometer data, converted into ionospheric ﬁeld-aligned current densities.
Using these processing techniques, GOCE, GRACE and GRACE-FO can be turned into sources of valuable
thermosphere-ionosphere data, that supplement dedicated missions such as Swarm, in terms of temporal and
spatial coverage.

To demonstrate the value of this data in the space weather and space physics domains, we provide comparisons of
these data with other data sources, such as AMPERE, as well as with output of a global thermosphere-ionosphere
general circulation model. It is noteworthy that satellite mission concepts for investigations of thermosphere-
ionosphere coupling, that are currently under study, would carry similar devices and beneﬁt from similar satellite
platform designs and orbits as the current gravity ﬁeld missions. It is clear that there is a large potential to increase
this synergy today, and opportunity for dual-purpose missions in the future. We therefore conclude by providing
recommendations in terms of instrumentation and data handling for present and future missions.

