Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-14448, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Mechanisms of Indian Summer Monsoon Change in the HAPPI 1.5 ◦C
and 2.0 ◦C Future Climate Experiments
Jon Shonk and Andrew Turner
NCAS, University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom

The Indian Summer Monsoon is an important part of the tropical climate system. As millions of people are
dependent on its rainfall, the need to be able to produce reliable projections of how monsoon rainfall is likely
to change in a future warmer climate is clear. In this work, part of the REAL Projections project, we use data
from the HAPPI (Half a Degree Additional Warming: Prognosis and Projected Impacts) project, which comprises
ten-year multi-model climate simulations imposing current climate conditions, and two sets of additional ten-year
simulations in a future climate that is either 1.5 ◦C or 2.0 ◦C warmer.

We compare both current climate simulations and changes in a warmer climate across ﬁve models from the
HAPPI dataset. While the models agree on the general large-scale pattern of monsoon circulation and how
that pattern could change, there is a great deal of disagreement in the detail. Consistency maps show that,
even though the models all capture the general patterns of change, there is a disagreement in the sign and the
magnitude of the predicted rainfall changes over India. We then compare the 1.5◦ C warmer and 2.0◦ C warmer
scenarios and ﬁnd that, in terms of monsoon rainfall and circulation strength, the extra 0.5 ◦C of warming
generally enhances the change from the initial 1.5 ◦C, but not in every model. We also examine the timing of
the monsoon onset and the structure of its vertical circulation, which reveals different behaviours across the models.

Next, we will investigate the changes to the Indian Summer Monsoon in more detail using the large num-
ber of ensemble members available in the HAPPI data. We will examine the ranges of interannual variability
of various monsoon indices and how these change in a warmer climate. We will also examine changes in the
occurrence of extreme weather events.

