Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-6408-2, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Detection of travelling ionospheric disturbances in TechTIDE EC H2020
project and perspectives for the development of mitigation strategies

Anna Belehaki (1) and TechTIDE Consortium (2)
(1) National Observatory of Athens, IAASARS, Thissio, Greece (belehaki@noa.gr), (2) TechTIDE EU H2020 Consortium
(techtide.project@gmail.com)

Travelling Ionospheric Disturbances (TIDs) constitute an important Space Weather effect in the upper atmosphere
driven by the near-Earth space dynamics and by lower atmosphere phenomena. TIDs are the ionospheric man-
ifestation of internal atmospheric gravity waves (AGW) in the neutral atmosphere. Independent of their source,
TIDs can impose signiﬁcant disturbances in the electron density, and Doppler frequency shifts on High Frequency
(HF) signals, affecting all technologies using predictable ionospheric characteristics. In general, TIDs affect all
technologies using predictable ionospheric characteristics. Recently it is clearly demonstrated that TIDs can have
multiple effects in the operation of aerospatial and ground-based infrastructures and especially in the European
Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service (EGNOS) and Network Real-Time Kinematic (N-RTK) services, in HF
communications, in radio reconnaissance operations and in Very High Frequency – Ultra High Frequency (VHF –
UHF) radiowave propagation. The newly funded EC Horizon 2020 Project TechTIDE has the objective to design
and test new viable TID impact mitigation strategies for the technologies affected. For this purpose, it is primar-
ily required to develop a system able to calculate in real-time the main TID characteristics (velocity, amplitude,
propagation direction), to realistically specify background ionospheric conditions and to specify those ionospheric
characteristics whose perturbation, because of TIDs, cause the impact in each speciﬁc technology. The talk re-
views the most well-known methodologies for the identiﬁcation and tracking of TIDs based on the exploitation of
real-time observations from networks of Digisonde, GNSS receivers and Continuous Doppler Sounding Systems
and reports on preliminary results from cross validation studies. Activities planned by the TechTIDE consortium
for the development of a warning system able to support the development of mitigation technologies will be also
presented.

