Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-8788, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Implementation of Sentinel-5p data in the CAMS global data assimilation
system

Richard Engelen, Melanie Ades, Jerôme Barré, Antje Inness, Roberto Ribas, Anna Agusti-Panareda, Johannes
Flemming, Zak Kipling, Mark Parrington, Vincent-Henri Peuch, and Martin Suttie
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, Research Department, Reading, United Kingdom
(richard.engelen@ecmwf.int)

The Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) led by ECMWF will be one of the major users of
Sentinel-5p data. The much-improved quality and spatial resolution of the S5p observations is expected to improve
the CAMS analyses and forecasts. During the S5p commissioning phase ECMWF already started testing data and
is providing valuable feedback on the data quality to ESA and the retrieval algorithm teams.
A global data assimilation system is a powerful tool to monitor the quality of satellite data because it provides
continuous global coverage and allows us to build up statistics of the differences between the (new) observations
and the model quickly. The model ﬁelds are interpolated in time and space to the location of the observations,
statistical analyses of the differences between the model’s ﬁrst guess or analysis ﬁelds and the observations (the
so-called departures) are calculated and their time evolution is monitored. When the observations are stable,
the departures normally show a relatively smooth behaviour from day to day. A sudden jump on a global scale,
which is larger than the instrument noise, is an indication of possible problems in the data or potentially the
model. Long term monitoring statistics can also detect (regional) biases between the model, which is constrained
by many different (satellite) data sets, and the S5p observations and between different satellite retrievals (e.g.
between ozone retrievals from different instruments such as S5p, GOME-2 and OMI) and allows us to monitor
S5p instrument and algorithm stability.
As a ﬁrst step, the S5p data are included passively in the global CAMS data assimilation system. This means
the data will be fed into the system and ﬁrst-guess statistics will be calculated. However, the data will not be
assimilated into the CAMS model and therefore not inﬂuence the model ﬁelds at this stage. This assessment
can take several months to ensure the new observations can be safely used to improve the CAMS analyses and
forecasts. Once the results look good, the new observations will be used to constrain the CAMS system as part of
the various satellite data sets that are used each day.
In this presentation, we will show the methodology for the monitoring of S5p data with the CAMS system and
present ﬁrst results.

