Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-5165-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Sentinel-5 Precursor: Early In-Flight Operation & Results

Herbert Nett (1), Sten Ekholm (1), Kevin McMullan (1), Willy Rits (1), Stefano Mattia (1), Eric Pourrier (1),
Daniel Mesples (2), Pepijn Veefkind (3), Maximilian Schwinger (4), Diego Loyola (4), Quintus Kleipool (3), and
Antje Ludewig (3)
(1) ESA/ESTEC, Earth Observation Project Department, Noordwijk ZH, Netherlands (herbert.nett@esa.int), (2) ESA/ESOC,
Robert-Bosch-Str. 5, D-64293 Darmstadt (daniel.mesples@esa.int), (3) KNMI, Utrechtseweg 297, NL-3731 GA De Bilt
(pepijn.veefkind@knmi.nl), (4) DLR-EOC, Oberpfaffenhofen, D-82234 Wessling (maximilian.Schwinger@dlr.de)

As ﬁrst atmospheric mission within the EC’s Copernicus Programme the Sentinel-5 Precursor (S-5P) satellite
was launched on 13 October ‘17. Following a ﬂawless orbit injection and platform functional check-out the
spacecraft’s only payload instrument TROPOMI (TROPOspheric Monitoring Instrument) was switched on after a
25 days outgassing period.
Immediately after the instrument’s radiant cooler opening, on 7 November ’17, ﬁrst Earth radiance measurements
were acquired and an extensive in-ﬂight calibration and characterization program was started. Besides Phase
E1 speciﬁc measurements nominal Earth radiance and Solar irradiance observations were acquired for use in
functional tests by the Level 1B / 2 processor developers. Various minor – though important – corrections to
algorithms and conﬁguration settings were identiﬁed leading to the installation of enhanced processor versions in
the S5P Payload Data Ground Segment (PDGS) mid December ‘17. The updated processors were used to generate
a ﬁrst set of sample products (Level 1B & 2) for delivery to expert teams worldwide taking part in the S-5P CalVal
Announcement of Opportunity project.
During the ﬁrst part of the 6 months commissioning phase excellent performance of the S-5P satellite has been
demonstrated and key parameters regarding the payload’s radiometric sensitivity, spatial resolution and sampling
capabilities could be fully veriﬁed. The Phase E1 speciﬁc measurement tasks will be completed in April ’18
leading to the release of a second, overall update of L1B/2 processing chains and related calibration key data. The
routine operations phase (Phase E2), with a nominal duration of 6.5 years, will commence immediately after the
spacecraft In-Orbit Commissioning Review scheduled end April ’18.
This paper will provide an overview of the S-5P commissioning tasks and report on results of early in-ﬂight
calibration activities. An outlook will be given on the transition to the routine operations phase.

