Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-5305-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Space Weather – Technology, Research, and Education Center
(SWx-TREC)

Daniel N. Baker, Jeffrey P. Thayer, and Thomas E. Berger
University of Colorado Boulder, Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, Boulder, Colorado, United States
(daniel.baker@lasp.colorado.edu)

SWx-TREC is a new Center at the University of Colorado – Boulder initiated under a grant intended to create
a center of gravity for the many units at CU working on space weather topics. TREC will be in the College
of Engineering and Applied Science and the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP). It will
be able to work across the usual academic boundaries to better develop and integrate space weather models,
missions, and data that will have a direct beneﬁt to the operational forecasting ofﬁces. TREC will also be the focal
point for creating undergraduate, graduate, and professional courses in space weather. In short, TREC is a new
academic research and technology center dedicated to helping bridge the gap between space weather research and
operations, and to educating the space science workforce, from undergraduates to industry professionals. TREC
will be complementary to NASA’s Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC) but with a more academic
mission. TREC will work with CCMC and operational forecast ofﬁces to develop and transition new models and
tools that improve forecasting and nowcasting. TREC will offer “O2R” functionality by bringing national and
international researchers to Boulder to work in close proximity with NOAA forecasters and scientists on select
areas of research and technology. TREC will also be focusing signiﬁcant effort on its educational mission in
alignment with CU’s mission as a leading space science university. Thus, TREC is not a repository for general
research models or an operational forecast ofﬁce. There are a lot of areas where CU and other Boulder partners
have unique capabilities that can contribute to the R2O and O2R functions in ways that complement CCMC’s
capabilities.

