Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-16003, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

All-weather land surface temperature estimates from microwave satellite
observations, over several decades and real time: methodology and
comparison with infrared estimates

Carlos Jimenez (1,2), Catherine Prigent (2,1,3), Filipe Aires (2,1,3), and Soﬁa Ermida (4)
(1) Estellus, Paris, France (carlos.jimenez@estellus.fr), (2) LERMA, Observatoire de Paris, Paris, France, (3) Department of
Earth & Environment Engineering, Columbia University, New York, USA, (4) Instituto Dom Luiz, University of Lisbon,
Lisbon, Portugal

The land surface temperature can be estimated from satellite passive microwave observations, with limited
contamination from the clouds as compared to the infrared satellite retrievals. With ∼60% cloud cover in
average over the globe, there is a need for “all weather,” long record, and real-time estimates of land surface
temperature (LST) from microwaves. A simple yet accurate methodology is developed to derive the land surface
temperature from microwave conical scanner observations, with the help of pre-calculated land surface microwave
emissivities. The method is applied to the Special Sensor Microwave/Imagers (SSM/I) and the Earth observation
satellite (EOS) Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer (AMSR-E) observations, regardless of the cloud cover.

The SSM/I results are compared to infrared estimates from International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project
(ISCCP) and from Advanced Along Track Scanning Radiometer (AATSR), under clear-sky conditions. Limited
biases are observed (∼0.5 K for both comparisons) with a root-mean-square difference (RMSD) of ∼5 K, to be
compared to the RMSE of ∼3.5 K between ISCCP et AATSR. AMSR-E results are compared with the Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) clear-sky estimates. As AMSR-E and MODIS are on board the
same satellite, this reduces the uncertainty associated to the observations match-up, resulting in a lower RMSD
of ∼ 4K. AMSR-E is also compared with the Spinning Enhanced Visible and Infrared Imager (SEVIRI), the
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) Imager, and the Japanese Meteorological Imager
(MTSAT). When comparing with all infrared sensors, the STD of the differences between microwave and infrared
LST is generally higher than between IR retrievals. However, the biases between microwave and infrared LST are,
in some cases, of the same order as the ones observed between infrared products.

The microwave LSTs are also compared to in situ LST time series from a collection of ground stations
over a large range of environments. For 22 stations available in the 2003-2004 period, SSM/I LSTs agree very
well for stations in vegetated environments (down to RMSD of ∼2.5 K for several stations), but the retrieval
methodology encounters difﬁculties under cold conditions due to the large variability of snow and ice surface
emissivities. For 10 stations in the year 2010, AMSR-E presents an all-station mean RMSD of ∼4.0 K with respect
tom the ground LSTs. Over the same stations, MODIS agrees better (RMSD of 2.4 K), but AMSR-E provides
a larger number of LSTs estimates by being able to measure under cloudy conditions, with an approximated
ratio of 3 to 1 over the analysed stations. At many stations the RMSD of the AMSR-E clear and cloudy-sky are
comparable, highlighting the ability of the microwave inversions to provide LSTs under most atmospheric and
surface conditions.

