Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-14761, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Future Changes in Moisture Transport towards the Alps

Regula Mülchi (1) and Olivia Martius (1,2)
(1) Oeschger Centre for Climate Change Research, Institute of Geography, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
(regula.muelchi@giub.unibe.ch), (2) Mobiliar Lab for Natural Risks, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

High amounts of integrated vapor transport (IVT) in the atmosphere directed perpendicular to orography often
leads to heavy precipitation in the Alps and other mountainous areas around the world. Such high IVT reaching
the Alps either from the south or the north were identiﬁed as important precursors for major ﬂoods in Switzerland.
Thus, the future evolution of high IVT is of particular interest for adaptation planning. It is important to know how
the moisture transport will evolve in future in terms of intensity but also ﬂux direction. Therefore, we analyze IVT
projections for the RCP8.5 scenario by models from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5).
To check the accuracy of the models and the effect of the model grid resolution, present day IVT from the CMIP5
models is compared to the ERA-Interim reanalysis data (period 1979-2015). First results (for GFDL-ESM2G
model) indicate that the model tends to overestimate IVT compared to the reanalysis data. This overestimation
seems to be mainly caused by the very smooth model orography. Then several statistical moments of the IVT
distribution as well as frequency, direction and seasonality of high IVT are considered for the comparison of future
and historical periods. Preliminary results show that the model projects an intensiﬁcation of IVT directed towards
the Alps. The difference between future and historical periods is signiﬁcant and becomes larger for more extreme
the IVT percentiles and the more distant future. However, changes in IVT directed perpendicular to the Alps
are smaller than the changes of all IVT events independent of direction. To analyze changes of extreme IVT we
ﬁtted Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) distributions to yearly block maxima and compared the distributions and
their corresponding parameters for future and historical periods. Fitting GEVs to yearly block maxima per pixel
indicates a shift in the distribution of extreme IVT from historical period to the far future period (2080 - 2100).
Finally,we decompose the dynamical and the thermodynamical contribution to the detected changes in IVT and its
extremes.

