Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13029, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Impacts of ocean-atmospheric oscillations on Mediterranean hydrology

Laura Crocetti (1), Wouter Dorigo (1), Brecht Martens (2), Agnes Kauer (1), Bernhard Bauer-Marschallinger (1),
Angelika Xaver (1), Diego Miralles (2), Victor Pellet (3), and Filipe Aires (3)
(1) CLIMERS - Climate and Environmental Remote Sensing Research Group, Department of Geodesy and Geoinformation,
TU WIEN, Vienna, Austria (laura.crocetti@geo.tuwien.ac.at), (2) Laboratory of Hydrology and Water Management, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium, (3) Estellus, Observatoire de Paris, Paris, France

The Mediterranean basin is a region that is expected to be strongly impacted by climate change. Therefore it is
important to analyse the water cycle over this region and the climate variability, which is expected to be controlled
by oceanic-atmospheric oscillation patterns. However, the connection between Mediterranean hydrology and
ocean-atmospheric oscillations is still poorly understood, because of uncertainties in the observations and the
co-varying behaviour of multiple oscillations. Therefore, it is necessary to improve our understanding of these
connections to provide better predictions about the evolution of the Mediterranean climate and hydrology.

Here, we present a supervised learning approach to disentangle the impact of seventeen ocean-atmospheric
oscillations on hydrological variables such as precipitation, evaporation and changes in terrestrial water storage.
This supervised learning approach is based on least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) models.
Our methodology allows us to account for cross-correlations in the predictors, which are in our case the climate
oscillation indices. The hydrological variables are provided by the WACMOS-MED dataset, which is available
for the Mediterranean area and optimised by constraining on the closure of the water budget. However, the impact
of ocean-atmospheric oscillations on Mediterranean hydrology is not necessarily instantaneous. To take this into
account, time lags ranging between zero and ﬁve months were introduced in every predictor. Besides using the
entire available timespan at once, we also perform the analysis for the four seasons.

Our results show the impact of ocean-atmospheric oscillations on the different components of the hydro-
logical cycle in the Mediterranean region. Particularly, we reveal a strong signal of the East Atlantic Oscillation,
the North Atlantic Oscillation and the East Atlantic West Russia pattern on precipitation during the winter months.
Especially Western Europe seems to be affected by those oscillations. The signal of the East Atlantic Oscillation
is almost only positive, the East Atlantic West Russia pattern inﬂuences the region solely negatively and the North
Atlantic Oscillation has both, a positive impact in the north and a negative inﬂuence in the south of Western Europe.

study

is

funded

This
(http://wacmosmed.estellus.fr/) and the Belgian Science Police Ofﬁce SAT-EX project
ex.ugent.be/).

the WACMOS-MED project

European

of

the

by

Space Agency
(http://www.sat-

