Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-5462, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Testing adaptation measures to reduce impact of climate change on
agriculture production in Jordan

Saeb A. Khresat (1), Fadi Shraideh (2), and Amer Meadat (2)
(1) Jordan University of Science and Technology, Amman, Jordan (skhresat@just.edu.jo), (2) International Union for
Conservation of Nature, ROWA, Amman,Jordan

Global climate change will affect crop production worldwide, especially in arid areas with scarce water resources.
Jordan is a vulnerable country in terms of climate change impact. Jordan will suffer from reduced agricultural
productivity due to more erratic rainfall patterns, reduced freshwater resources and increased temperatures.
The Third National Communication (TNC) to the United Nations Framework Convention to Climate Change
(UNFCCC) foresees that over the next three decades, Jordan will witness a rise in temperature, drop in rainfall,
reduced ground cover, reduced water availability, heat-waves, and more frequent dust storms.
The most probable scenario would be an increased air temperature of 1.5º C and 16% decrease in precipitation
by 2050.The trends of decreased rainfall and increased temperature are expected to reduce crop yield and thus
increase the vulnerability. The anticipated increase in temperature and decrease in precipitation would adversely
affect crops and water availability, critically inﬂuencing the patterns of future agricultural production. The
anticipated increase in temperature and decrease in precipitation in 2030 and 2050 would result in yield reduction
for major ﬁeld crops and vegetable crops.
This increase in temperature will decrease the yield by 15-20% and decrease the planted area by 25%. Some of
the tested adaptation measures included the improvement of soil water harvesting techniques; the implementation
of sustainable soil and land management; crop residues management; the selection of drought-tolerant crop
varieties and changing sowing dates. Those measures helped in reducing the impact of climate change on the crop
productivity by 35% for ﬁeld and vegetable crops.

