Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-9143, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Satellite Observations of Stratospheric Injection of Carbonaceous
Aerosols from Boreal Forest Fires

Omar Torres (1), Pawan Bhartia (1), Ghassan Taha (2), Changwoo Ahn (3), and Hiren Jethva (2)
(1) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, United States (omar.o.torres@nasa.gov), (2) Universities Space Research
Association, Greenbelt, MD, United States, (3) Science Systems and Applications, Inc., Lanham, MD, United States

Unprecedented amounts of tropospheric carbonaceous aerosols generated by wildﬁres in British Columbia (BC)
on August and September 2017 were injected into the stratosphere on at least three different occasions. This
extraordinary event was observed from space by both active and passive, proﬁling and mapping sensors. The
Earth Polychromatic Imaging Camera (EPIC) onboard the Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) at the L-1
point observed the spatial and temporal evolution of the aerosol plume for about six weeks since the onset of the
wildﬁres in early August. EPIC’s unique capability of observing the diurnal cycle during daylight hours at any
point on the Earth’s surface allowed following the progression of the BC smoke plume several times (as many as
six) depending on the location. The EPIC’s characterization of the BC plume was carried in terms of the qualitative
UV Aerosol Index (UVAI) parameter and aerosol optical depth (AOD) as the plume traveled above tropospheric
water clouds in some instances and in completely clear skies on others. Under cloud free conditions, an estimate of
the plume’s single scattering albedo (SSA) was also obtained. The unusually high UVAI values (in excess of 20)
recorded by EPIC for this plume pointed to an elevated aerosol layer well above the tropopause. This event was
promptly conﬁrmed by CALIOP and OMPS-LP observations that clearly detected the presence of the stratospheric
smoke plume in a layer between 12 and 16 km. The resulting stratospheric carbonaceous aerosol layer was quickly
mobilized eastward across the Atlantic Ocean, reaching Europe and Asia in about ﬁve days. A detailed discussion
of plume characteristics as seen from EPIC near UV space observations and the OMPS- LP will be presented.

