Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-5536-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Wildﬁre-Driven Thunderstorms Cause a Volcano-Like Stratospheric
Injection of Smoke

David Peterson (1), James Campbell (1), Edward Hyer (1), Michael Fromm (2), George (Pat) Kablick (2), Joshua
Cossuth (1), and Matthew DeLand (3)
(1) U. S. Naval Research Laboratory, Monterey, CA, USA (david.peterson@nrlmry.navy.mil), (2) U. S. Naval Research
Laboratory, Washington, DC, USA, (3) Science Systems and Applications, Inc. (SSAI), Lanham, MD, USA

Intense heating by wildﬁres can generate a deep, smoke-infused thunderstorm, known as pyrocumulonimbus (py-
roCb), which can release a large quantity of smoke particles into the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere.
To date, however, the impact of pyroCb on climate has never been systematically explored, and remains almost
completely unquantiﬁed. Here we employ satellite observations to quantify the mass of smoke aerosol injected
into the lower stratosphere from ﬁve near-simultaneous intense pyroCb observed in western North America on
12 August 2017. We ﬁnd that the stratospheric aerosol mass injected by this extreme event was comparable to a
moderate volcanic eruption, or a Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) event measured between 3 and 4. The strato-
spheric impact was an order of magnitude larger than the most signiﬁcant single-event stratospheric intrusion of
smoke aerosol recorded to date, producing a high-altitude smoke layer that encircled the Northern Hemisphere
over several months. This extreme event likely exceeded the total stratospheric aerosol mass injected by all py-
roCb activity (26 events) observed during the ﬁre season of 2013 across western North America. These results
demonstrate that that pyroCb activity, quantiﬁed as either large singular events or a ﬁre season inventory, can sig-
niﬁcantly inﬂuence the lower-stratosphere in a manner similar to infrequent volcanic intrusions. The meteorology
driving pyroCb occurrence, combined with increasingly active ﬁre seasons, indicates that pyroCb are a signiﬁcant
and endemic summertime feature in several temperate regions worldwide. We anticipate that this study will es-
tablish a foundation for understanding the effects of pyroCb smoke on lower-stratospheric chemistry and dynamic
circulation.

