Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-3546, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Global aurora on Mars during the September 2017 Space Weather Event

Nicholas Schneider and the the MAVEN IUVS and P&F Teams
U. Colorado, LASP, Boulder, CO, United States (nick.schneider@lasp.colorado.edu)

In September 2017, the Imaging UltraViolet Spectrograph (IUVS) on the MAVEN spacecraft observed global
aurora on Mars caused by a surprisingly strong solar energetic particle event. Widespread “diffuse aurora” have
previously been detected on Mars through more limited observations (Schneider et al., Science 350, (2015); DOI:
10.1126/science.aad0313), but the recent observations established complete coverage of the observable portion of
Mars’ nightside. The aurora was global due to Mars’s lack of a global magnetic ﬁeld, which allowed energetic
electrons from the Sun to directly precipitate into the atmosphere. On September 11th, IUVS detected aurora
more than 25 times brighter than any prior IUVS observation, with high SNR detections of aurora at the limb and
against the disk of the planet. Fainter auroral emission was seen around the nightside limb over 13 orbits spanning
nearly 3 days. We will present a review of the auroral images and limb scans along with MAVEN measurements
of solar energetic particles responsible for the event.

On September 14th, during the declining phase of the event, IUVS detected faint linear features and patches.
These features were above the the noise ﬂoor, with a similar spatial distribution to “discrete aurora” patches
observed on Mars by the SPICAM instrument on the Mars Express spacecraft (Bertaux et al., Nature 435, doi
:10.1038/nature03603). Discrete aurora occur near areas of the crust affected by the magnetism left over from
Mars’ once-strong dipole ﬁeld. Emission is limited to regions of the crustal magnetic ﬁeld where the ﬁeld lines are
likely to be open to solar wind interactions. Those regions are concentrated in Mars’ southern hemisphere centered
on 180 degrees east longitude. We studied the localized emissions on 14 September to determine whether there
might be a connection between the observed diffuse aurora event and discrete auroral processes. We conﬁrmed
that the observed signal of the localized emission was consistent with expected auroral spectra, and that their
locations coincide with open magnetic ﬁeld lines regions on crustal magnetic ﬁelds maps.

