Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-7687, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The boundary layer of the remote southeast Atlantic is often smoky and
other recent ﬁndings from the LASIC campaign

Paquita Zuidema
University of Miami, RSMAS/MPO, Miami, United States (pzuidema@rsmas.miami.edu)

Paquita Zuidema and the LASIC Science and Instrument Team

From June 1, 2016 through October 31, 2017, the DOE ARM Mobile Facility 1 characterized the aerosol
and cloud structure during two biomass-burning aerosol seasons to unprecedented detail over Ascension Island
(14W, 8S). The island is subject to the outﬂow of biomass-burning aerosol from continental Africa, over 1500 km
away, from approximately July to November and is located within warm ocean waters that encourage trade-wind
cumulus within deep boundary layers. An early, unexpected ﬁnding is that smoke reaches the surface more often
than not, at times reaching black carbon mass concentrations similar to those near ﬁre sources on land. The
synoptic variation is strong, with very clean surface conditions also occasionally present. The aerosol vertical
distribution shifts, broadly, from one weighted towards the surface to more in the free-troposphere, from July
to November. Free-tropospheric aerosol, when present, is typically in contact with the uppermost cloud layer.
Filter-based estimates indicate more shortwave absorption and lower single-scattering albedos earlier in the boreal
summer for the same black carbon mass, indicating changes in the composition of the accompanying (e.g., brown)
carbon. The event with the highest aerosol loading is explained by a direct transport into the boundary layer of
smoke from the continent, but this transport pathway is otherwise atypical. The boundary layer is deeper when
smoke is present near the surface and more well-mixed, with a stronger diurnal cycle in the boundary layer
potential temperature. The non-precipitating low cloud fraction decreases when smoke is present in the boundary
layer (a cloud ‘burn-off’ response). In summary the new observations indicate an aerosol-cloud regime that is
extensive and with the potential to demonstrate unanticipated aerosol-cloud interactions.

