Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10656-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

A Bayesian Approach to Statistical Post-Processing

Roman Krzysztofowicz (1), Zoltan Toth (2), Mark Antolik (3), Geary Layne (4), Melissa Petty (1), Malaquias
Pena (5), and Yi Wang (6)
(1) University of Virginia, (2) Global Systems Division, NOAA/OAR/ESRL, (3) Meteorological Development Laboratory,
NOAA/NWS, (4) CIRES at GSD/ESRL/OAR/NOAA, (5) University of Connecticut, (6) Visiting Scientist at GSD (permanent
afﬁliation: CMA)

Weather affects a wide range of individual and institutional activities. Users seek the most skillful and calibrated
forecasts available, hence weather agencies must be prepared to provide information on any aspect of future
weather, in any form requested. Today, most weather forecasts are based on Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP)
model output. Such guidance (e.g., single or ensemble forecasts) is (1) available from multiple sources (with
partially independent information); and due to modeling limitations, (2) they suffer from lead-time dependent
miscalibration (systematic errors), and (3) are limited to some basic coarser scale variables that may not be of
direct interest to most users. Hence the three main objectives of statistical post-processing of NWP output are: (1)
Combine all predictive information into a single guidance product; (2) Calibrate such guidance; and (3) Provide
additional information beyond that carried in NWP forecasts.

In this presentation, we outline a methodology called the Bayesian Processor of Ensemble (BPE), designed
to accomplish the above objectives. BPE follows a theoretically based approach and uses the climatological
distribution of the predictand as a prior, signiﬁcantly reducing demand for the volume of hindcasts. It combines
all available independent and skillful guidance products (e.g., unperturbed and ensemble forecasts from multiple
centers) to produce, given the input, the most skillful calibrated posterior forecast cdf, pdf, quantile, and alternative
scenario (i.e. ensemble) information. A meta-Gaussian distributional approach used in BPE enables the uniﬁed
processing of all continuous variables and provides an edge in processing extreme values. With an array of output
formats, any question about future weather, including those concerning probabilities for aggregated or joint
variables, can be answered.

