Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-18466, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Fukushima Daiichi–derived radionuclides in the atmosphere, transport
and deposition in Japan: a review

Anne Mathieu (1), Mizuo Kajino (2,3,4), Irène Korsakissok (1), Raphael Périllat (1,5), Denis Quélo (1), Arnaud
Quérel (1,6), Olivier Saunier (1), Thomas Sekiyama (2), Yasuhito Igarashi (2), and Damien Didier (1)
(1) Institut de Radioprotection et de Sûreté Nucléaire (IRSN), PSE-SANTE, SESUC, BMCA, 92262, Fontenay-aux-Roses
Cedex, France(anne.mathieu@irsn.fr), (2) 2Meteorological Research Institute (MRI), Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA),
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0052, Japan., (3) RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan,
(4) Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan, (5) Phimeca
Engineering, 75012, Paris, France, (6) Strathom Energie, 75002, Paris, France

The Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident of March 11 2011 led to a signiﬁcant release of radionu-
clides in the environment. More than 99 % of the release activity in the atmosphere was due to highly volatile
radionuclides such as I, Te, Cs, Xe, Kr.
Fairly quickly after the accident, the main release events had been identiﬁed and their consequences roughly
assessed. Most releases were dispersed over the Paciﬁc Ocean whereas about 20 % was dispersed over the Japan
main highland causing areas of signiﬁcant deposit. Since then, the understanding of the different episodes has been
greatly enhanced. It is appropriate to review what happened in terms of releases into the atmosphere, transport,
and deposition of radionuclides on the Japanese territory (Mathieu et al 2018). We describe here, the current state
of understanding of the release phase of the accident and the means used to achieve it.
Numerous radiological measurements taken in the Japanese environment enabled the scientists to substantially
reconstruct the four main sequences of contamination, to identify the probable trajectories of the radioactive
plumes, and to link them with precipitation data to explain the areas of deposition.
The measurements were supplemented by modelling techniques. The most signiﬁcant progress come from the
quantiﬁcation of the atmospheric releases, the improvement of meteorological data to better take into account
the inﬂuence of the complex orography on the plumes trajectories and the modelling of deposition processes.
Notwithstanding more realistic simulations, progress is still to be made to accurately estimate people exposure
due to the release phase of the FDNPP accident.
An important result is that the bulk of the deposition was mostly generated at the beginning of the precipitation, by
light rain in less than one hour. The scavenging of plume transported in altitude generates high deposition zones.
Therefore, they do not necessarily match the zones within which inhalation exposure to the radioactive plumes
was the largest.

