Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10686, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Investigating the impact of anthropogenic pollution on cloud properties
derived from ground based remote sensors at the North Slope of Alaska

Maximilian Maahn (1,2), Claudia Acquistapace (3), Gijs de Boer (1,2), Christopher Cox (1,2), Graham Feingold
(2), Tobias Marke (3), Christopher Williams (1,2)
(1) University of Colorado Boulder, CIRES, United States (maximilian.maahn@colorado.edu), (2) NOAA Earth System
Research Laboratory, Boulder, CO, USA, (3) University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

When acting as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) or ice nucleating particles (INPs), aerosols have a strong
potential to inﬂuence cloud properties. In particular, they can impact the number, size, and phase of cloud particles
and potentially cloud lifetime through aerosol indirect and semi-direct effects. In polar regions, these effects are
of great importance for the radiation budget due to the shortwave albedo and longwave emissivity of mixed-phase
clouds.

The Department of Energy (DOE) Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) program operates two su-
per sites equipped with state of the art ground-based remote sensing instruments in northern Alaska. The sites are
both coastal and are highly correlated with respect to large scale synoptic patterns. While the site at Utqia˙gvik
(formerly known as Barrow) generally represents a relatively pristine Arctic environment lacking signiﬁcant
anthropogenic sources, the site at Oliktok Point, approximately 250 km to the east, is surrounded by the Prudhoe
Bay Oil Field, which is the largest oil ﬁeld in North America. Comparing both sites allows to identify the impact
of anthropogenic pollution on cloud properties.

Based on aircraft measurement,
the authors recently showed that differences in the properties of liquid
clouds properties between the sites can be attributed to local emissions associated with the industrial activities in
the Prudhoe Bay region (Maahn et al. 2017, ACP). However, aircraft measurements do not provide a representative
sample of cloud properties due to temporal limitations in the amount of data. In order to investigate how frequently
and to what extent liquid cloud properties and processes are modiﬁed, we use ground based remote sensing
observations such as e.g., cloud radar, Doppler lidar, and microwave radiometer obtained continuously at the two
sites. In this way, we are able to quantify inter-site differences with respect to cloud drizzle production, liquid
water path, frequency of cloud occurrence, and cloud radiative properties.

