Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-11780, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Bridging experiments and molecular simulations to elucidate
heterogeneous ice nucleation

Sapna Sarupria (1), Brittany Glatz (1), Nurun Nahar Lata (2), Jiarun Zhou (1), and Will Cantrell (2)
(1) Clemson University, Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, United States (ssarupr@clemson.edu), (2) Department of
Physics, Michigan Technological University , United States (cantrell@mtu.edu)

Heterogeneous ice nucleation is the primary pathway for ice formation in the atmosphere. Different types of parti-
cles such as pollen, bacteria, and mineral dusts inﬂuence ice nucleation. In some cases, these particles allow ice to
form at temperatures as high as -3oC. In comparison, homogeneous ice nucleation occurs at -40oC. Currently, the
understanding of the interplay between surface’s chemical and physical properties and its ability to nucleate ice is
lacking. There is no framework to predict the ice nucleating ability of a surface based on it’s characteristics. The
primary challenge is the inability to access the relevant length and time scales. Nucleation occurs in nano-to-micro
second timescales and lengthscales of few hundred-to-thousand molecules. These are difﬁcult to probe in experi-
ments. In principle, these are ideal scales for molecular simulations, however, the challenge comes from the fact
that ice nucleation is a rare event – i.e., an event which occurs at frequencies lower than the simulation sampling
time.
Using advanced sampling techniques combined with molecular dynamics simulations, we have evaluated the role
of various surface properties on ice nucleation. We studied three types of surfaces – kaolinite-based, silver iodide-
like and mica surfaces. Capitalizing on the power of molecular simulations we have carefully probed the effects of
speciﬁc surface properties such as hydrogen bonding abilities, lattice spacing, and surface charge distribution on
the propensity to observe ice nucleation. We ﬁnd that certain characteristics of the liquid water structure – related
to the orientations of water molecules near the surface – are good indicators of possible ice nucleation.[1,2] We
are expanding our understanding to correlate these observations with experimental ﬁndings. To this end, we focus
on mica surfaces. Mica surfaces can be cleaved to be atomistically smooth in experiments. This makes them an
ideal choice for a collaborative experimental and simulation investigation since in simulations the surfaces are
usually made atomically smooth. We study the effects of surface ion, charge distribution and lattice spacing on ice
nucleation. Our simulations indicate that the interfacial structure of water near the mica surfaces provides signature
characteristics to predict the ice nucleating propensity. In experiments, we have used Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy to study the liquid water structure near the mica surfaces.[3,4] Through this combined approach, we
evaluate the role of surface chemistry on ice nucleation. In this talk, we will present these results and discuss how
we bridge experimental and simulations ﬁndings.
[1] Glatz, Brittany and Sarupria, S., “Heterogeneous ice nucleation: Interplay of surface properties and their impact
on water orientations”, (Langmuir, Just Accepted Manuscript, 2017)
[2] Glatz, B. and Sarupria, S, “The surface charge distribution affects the ice nucleating efﬁciency of silver iodide”,
Journal of Chemical Physics 145, 211924, 2016
[3] Niehaus, J., K. W. Bunker, S. China, A. Kostinski, C. Mazzoleni, and W. Cantrell. “A technique to measure ice
nuclei in the contact mode.” J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 31, 913–922, 2014
[4] Cantrell, W. and G. Ewing. “Attenuated (but not Total) Internal Reﬂection FTIR spectroscopy of thin ﬁlms”.
Applied Spectroscopy, 56, 665-669, 2002.

