Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-5231, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Toward an empirically-based characterization of methane emissions from
oil and gas: from atmospheric measurements to effective emission
reductions

Daniel Zavala-Araiza (1) and Steven P. Hamburg (2)
(1) Environmental Defense Fund, Climate and Energy Program, Austin, United States (dzavala@edf.org), (2) Environmental
Defense Fund, New York, United States (shamburg@edf.org)

Methane, the principal component of natural gas, is a powerful greenhouse gas. While there are several sources of
anthropogenic methane (e.g., agriculture, waste sector), oil and gas infrastructure is physically concentrated and
the number of organizations responsible for operating this equipment is relatively limited: creating an opportunity
for rapid cost-effective mitigation that can yield signiﬁcant and rapid climatic beneﬁts.

There is uncertainty in the scale and location of methane emissions from oil and gas infrastructure within
and among regions of the world. An empirically-based characterization of emission sources is critical to improv-
ing emission inventories and implementing effective mitigation strategies.

We synthesize results from recent multi-scale ﬁeld studies (i.e. aircraft-based, ground-based) across North
America, where empirical data clearly indicate that emissions are higher than inventories suggest, and there is a
disproportionate contribution from a small fraction of high-emitting sites/facilities to total emissions.

We highlight speciﬁc examples where the information produced by the multi-scale studies has guided a di-
versity of decision makers including (i) improvements/updates to national emission inventories, (ii) collaborations
that focus on detecting and quantifying high-emitting sources, (iii) national and sub-national entities that have
incorporated empirical data into the design of effective regulations.

Finally, we identify sectors and geographies within the oil and gas supply chain where similar work is
needed to reduce uncertainty and identify further mitigation opportunities. We summarize how the Climate and
Clean Air Coalition (CCAC) Oil and Gas Methane Study and the Integrated Global Greenhouse Gas Information
System (IG3IS) will expand this effort, and the importance of ensuring transparency of the collected data, external
review, deployment of multiple methodologies, and publication of results in peer-reviewed journals.

