Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-4506, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The EC Horizon 2020 project SWAMI: Space Weather Atmosphere
Model and Indices

Sean Bruinsma (1), David Jackson (2), Claudia Stolle (3), and Sandra Negrin (4)
(1) CNES, Space Geodesy Ofﬁce, Toulouse, France (sean.bruinsma@cnes.fr), (2) Met Ofﬁce, Exeter, United Kingdom
(david.jackson@metofﬁce.gov.uk), (3) GFZ Helmholtz Centre Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany (cstolle@gfz-potsdam.de), (4)
DEIMOS Space S.L.U, Madrid, Spain (sandra.negrin@elecnor-deimos.com)

In the framework of the H2020 project SWAMI, which started in January 2018, a new whole atmosphere model
(0-1500 km) will be developed that can be used for launch operations, re-entry computations, orbit prediction, as
well as aeronomy and space weather studies. Such a model is currently not available in Europe, whereas models
in the US and Japan have irreconcilable limits for users.
The model will be constructed by blending two existing models, the Drag Temperature Model (DTM) and the
Uniﬁed Model (UM). The CNES thermosphere speciﬁcation model DTM2013, which was developed in the FP7
project ATMOP, will ﬁrst be improved by assimilating more density data to drive down remaining biases as a
function of solar activity and seasons mainly. Secondly, a new high cadence Kp geomagnetic index, which will
be developed as part of the project, will be used in order to improve storm-time performance. Compared to
the progress made in solar activity proxy research, geomagnetic index development and forecasting is lagging;
SWAMI will focus on improving the geomagnetic index as well as its forecast. The Met Ofﬁce UM will be
extended to the lower thermosphere in order to have an overlap with DTM. Then, the average of a multi-year run
and the inter-annual variability are computed, representing climatology and weather, respectively. UM and DTM
will then be blended in the 120-160 km altitude region to create a whole atmosphere model, which will be made
available in a user-friendly package in 2020.

