Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10761, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Extreme Earth: Advancing global storm resolving models to usher in a
new era of climate modelling and climate change science.

Bjorn Stevens
Max Planck Institute for Meteorology, Managing Director, Hamburg, Germany (bjorn.stevens@mpimet.mpg.de)

Over the past decades climate models have contributed to many advances in our understanding of climate change.
So it should come as no surprise that some of the most outstanding open problems in climate science, questions
such as how clouds and circulation respond to warming, can be linked to basic and well recognized deﬁciencies
in how these models are formulated. In the past, computational limitations and incomplete understanding forced
us to accept these deﬁciencies. Today, the computational limitations are falling away, and a new quality of climate
model— Global Storm (or Cloud) Resolving Models — is coming into more common use. By virtue of their
ability to resolve the main modes of energy transport, these models (and their oceanic counterparts) provide a more
fundamental representation of the climate system, and a more direct link to observations, than is possible with the
quasi-two dimensional models that we have become accustomed to. By more naturally linking diabatic processes
to circulation, these models offer the best chance to make progress on what otherwise seem to be intractable
problems: from quantifying radiative forcing, to bounding climate sensitivity, to assessing factors inﬂuencing shifts
in circulation patterns, to determining the origins of extremes. In this talk I will describe how and why differences
between Global Storm Resolving Models and traditional climate models are so decisive. I will also outline how
Extreme Earth, a European Initiative on Future and Emerging Technology, proposes to enable the use of Global
Storm Resolving Models to usher in a new era of climate modelling and climate change science

