Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-15634, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Future changes in intense precipitation over Europe at the daily and
sub-daily time scales

Enrico Scoccimarro (1), Gabriele Villarini (3), Marcello Vichi (4), Matteo Zampieri (5), Alessio Bellucci (1), Pier
Giuseppe Fogli (1), and Silvio Gualdi (2)
(1) Fondazione Centro euro-Mediterraneo sui Cambiamenti Climatici, Centro euro Mediterraneo sui Cambiamenti Climatici,
Italy (enrico.scoccimarro@cmcc.it), (2) Istituto Nazionale di Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia, (3) IIHR-Hydroscience &
Engineering, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, (4) Department of Oceanography, University of Cape Town, (5) European
Commission, Ispra, Italy

Heavy precipitation is a major hazard over Europe. It is well established that climate model projections indicate
a tendency towards more extreme daily rainfall events. It is still uncertain, however, how this changing intensity
translates at the sub-daily time scales. The main goal of the present study is to examine possible differences in
projected changes in intense precipitation events over Europe at the daily and sub-daily (3-hourly) time scales
using a state-of-the-art climate model. The focus will be on one Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP8.5),
considered as illustrative of a high rate of increase in greenhouse gas concentrations over this century. There are
statistically signiﬁcant differences in intense precipitation projections (up to 40%) when comparing the results
at the daily and sub-daily time scales. Over north-eastern Europe, projected precipitation intensiﬁcation at the
3-hour scale is lower than at the daily scale. On the other hand, Spain and the western seaboard exhibit an opposite
behaviour, with stronger intensiﬁcation at the 3-hour scale rather than daily scale. While the mean properties of
the precipitation distributions are independent of the analysed frequency, projected precipitation intensiﬁcation
exhibits regional differences. This ﬁnding has implications on the extrapolation of impacts of intense precipitation
events, given the daily time scale the analyses are usually performed at.

