Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-17275-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Identiﬁcation of urbanization in Rio de Janeiro based on land-surface
temperature using the Rio de Janeiro Petrochemical Complex
(COMPERJ) as pilot area

Liz Belém (1), Leonardo Peres (1,2), and Andrews Lucena (3)
(1) Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Institute of Geosciences (IGEO), Department of Meteorology, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil (lizbarreto7@gmail.com; leonardo.peres@igeo.ufrj.br), (2) Portuguese Institute for Sea and Atmosphere
(IPMA), Lisbon, Portugal, (3) Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRRJ) Institute of Agronomy (IA), Department of
Geosciences, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (lucenageo@yahoo.com.br)

Urbanization studies are extremely important for both socioeconomic and environmental sectors as the impacts
caused by anthropogenic activities have been growing and damaging many areas. For instance, Rio de Janeiro
Petrochemical Complex (COMPERJ) is scheduled to begin operation in 2020. The facility is located on a 45
square kilometers land in Itaborai, Rio de Janeiro. It is expected that COMPERJ construction increases the pres-
sure on local infrastructure conditions and the environmental system. Accordingly, this manuscript aims to analyze
the impact of COMPERJ on land-surface temperature (LST) based on remotely sensed data from Landsat satellites
and uses this interesting region as a pilot area to analyze the LST behavior over time. Images were grouped in
two periods with the same number of years, 2002 to 2007 and 2008 to 2013, with the aim of representing envi-
ronmental conditions prior to construction and after the COMPERJ construction, respectively. Post-construction
results show a ring of LST concentric values coming from the colder outer part toward the warmer core with spa-
tial characteristics similar to an urban heat island (UHI). However, our results show that a comparison using LST
between different time periods to assess the urban increase or the UHI intensiﬁcation must be carefully conducted
as the spatial and temporal variations of LST are related not only to surface characteristics, but also to weather and
season. Our results show that although LST is closely related to surface characteristics, the weather and climate
conditions may have a greater inﬂuence on LST. In fact, results for individual images indicate that the LST values
before the construction of the COMPERJ can be both larger and smaller than the values referring to the period
after the construction and vice versa, indicating in some situations an overlap of the weather and/or climatic con-
ditions to the surface conditions. This fact is observed in both winter and summer. Accordingly, we have used the
COMPERJ region as a pilot area to test LST data normalization/standardization methods to reduce the inﬂuence
of background weather and climate conditions from different temporal times. The LST temporal evolution was
veriﬁed by the Students’s t statistical test conducted at the 5% level and it was not possible to conﬁrm based on the
Student’s test that LST values increased after COMPERJ construction. On the other hand, obtained results based on
the LST normalization/standardization conﬁrm, within the signiﬁcance level assumed, its increase just inside the
construction area of COMPERJ. Based on the results found in the pilot area, the LST normalization/standardization
was used to analyze the urbanization on Metropolitan Area of Rio de Janeiro (MARJ). The temporal analysis was
carried out based on the division of data in three decades 80, 90 and 2000. Results have conﬁrmed the difﬁculty to
move from a limited area to a great territorial extension, due to the different land covers, but despite this difﬁcult,
it is possible to identify urban areas and observe temporal changes using the LST normalization/standardization.

