Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-19659, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Long-term Monitoring of Methane Emissions from Natural Gas
Production in the Marcellus shale

Zachary Barkley, Thomas Lauvaux, Natasha Miles, Scott Richardson, Aijun Deng, Douglas Martins, Kenneth
Davis, Colm Sweeney, Kathryn McKain, Tom Murphy, Russ Dickerson, Xinrong Ren, Joshua DiGangi, and Alan
Fried

According to the US Environmental Protection Agency, more than 10% of all methane (CH4) emissions in the U.S.
are located along the western edge of the Appalachian mountains with the majority of these emissions coming from
natural gas infrastructure and coal mines. However, short-term atmospheric top-down studies over unconventional
wells in Pennsylvania have found emission rates to be much higher than reported estimates. To better understand
the causes of the discrepancy, we present the ﬁrst long-term (i.e.8-month) top-down estimates from a tower network
deployed across the Marcellus shale, measuring continuously CH4 and isotopic mixing ratios of 13CH4 at four
locations. We quantiﬁed gas-related emissions and compared our results to a high-resolution inventory and a one-
month aircraft campaign with 10 mass-balance emission estimates over the region. We also use the WRF-Chem
mesoscale model at 3km resolution to simulate CH4 enhancements from a customized emissions inventory and
compare the modelled enhancements to observations from the 10 ﬂights that were downwind of unconventional gas
wells. Based on the same modeled wind ﬁelds coupled to a Lagrangian Particle Dispersion model, we performed an
18-month Bayesian inversion. With repeated periods of enhanced atmospheric signals, we highlight the presence
of large temporal variations over four to six weeks, based on our long-term tower data set. We conclude here
that both aircraft- and tower-based emissions estimates show larger CH4 emissions than reported by the US EPA.
However, the overall leakage rate reported on a production basis remains small thanks to the high-producing wells
across the northeastern Marcellus shale region. To solve the source attribution problem, we also present how
we calibrated 13CH4 CRDS analyzers deployed at four locations which allowed us to separate natural gas from
biogenic sources. Finally, recent results from the Atmospheric Carbon and Transport (ACT-America) campaign
using ethane measurements to separate coal from natural gas CH4 emissions, highlighting the potential use of
atmospheric tracers to attribute emissions to speciﬁc sectors of activities.

