Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-4381, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Evidence that a continuous decline in lower stratospheric ozone is
offsetting ozone layer recovery

William Ball (1), Justin Alsing (2), Daniel Mortlock (), Johannes Staehelin (), Joanna Haigh (), Thomas Peter (),
Fiona Tummon (), Rene Stuebi (), Andrea Stenke (), John Anderson (), Adam Bourassa (), Sean Davis (), Doug
Degenstein (), Stacey Frith (), Lucien Froidevaux (), Chris Roth (), Viktoria Soﬁeva (), Ray Wang (), Jeannette
Wild (), Pengfei Yu (), and the Lower stratospheric ozone trends
(1) Institute for Atmospheric and Climate Science, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
(william.ball@env.ethz.ch), (2) Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, New York, USA
(jalsing@simonsfoundation.org)

The Montreal Protocol (MP) was enacted to halt damage to the protective ozone layer that resulted from emissions
of halogen-containing ozone-depleting substances. Measurements of total column ozone, the ozone between the
Earth’s surface and the top of the atmosphere, indicate that the ozone layer has stopped declining. While Montreal
Protocol related recovery in the upper stratosphere (above 32 km, between 60S-60N) has been conﬁrmed from
1998, no clear increase has been seen at latitudes outside the polar regions (60-90 degrees). We report evidence
from multiple satellite measurements that ozone in the lower stratosphere between 60S and 60N has continu-
ously declined since 1985. Even though upper stratospheric ozone is recovering the lower stratospheric decreases
more than compensates this, thus stratospheric column ozone between 60S and 60N continues to deplete. Further,
total column ozone (60S-60N) appears not to have decreased, which is attributable to increases in tropospheric
column ozone that compensate the stratospheric decreases. However, the reasons for the continued reduction of
lower stratospheric ozone are not clear as state-of-the-art chemistry climate models do not reproduce these trends.
Therefore, the causes now urgently need to be established.

