Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-11463-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

New insights into volcanic processes from satellite observations of SO2
emissions

Simon Carn (1), Vitali Fioletov (2), Chris McLinden (2), Can Li (3,4), and Nickolay Krotkov (4)
(1) Dept. of Geological and Mining Engineering and Sciences, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI, United
States (scarn@mtu.edu), (2) Air Quality Research Division, Environment and Climate Change Canada, Toronto, ON, Canada,
(3) Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center, University of Maryland College Park, MD, USA, (4) Atmospheric
Chemistry and Dynamics Laboratory, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA

Although observations of volcanic gas emissions from space may never achieve the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of
ground-based techniques, the great strength of satellite data lies in global coverage and consistency of measurement
over years to decades. These attributes are critical for advancing our understanding of volcano behavior on decadal
or longer timescales. Here, we report ongoing efforts to quantify the global ﬂux of sulfur dioxide (SO2) emitted
by passive volcanic degassing; a key parameter that constrains the ﬂuxes of other volcanic gases (e.g., CO2) and
trace metals (e.g., mercury), and which is also a required input for atmospheric chemistry and climate models
that include sulfate aerosol. We recently produced the ﬁrst volcanic SO2 emissions inventory derived from global
satellite measurements, made by the Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI) on NASA’s Aura satellite since 2005.
The OMI measurements permit estimation of SO2 emissions from over 90 volcanoes, including new constraints
on ﬂuxes from poorly monitored volcanoes in regions such as Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, the Aleutian Islands,
the Kuril Islands and Kamchatka. On average over the past decade, the volcanic SO2 sources consistently detected
from space have discharged a total of ∼63 kt/day SO2 during passive degassing, or ∼23+/-2 Tg/yr. Beyond these
improved constraints on volcanic emissions, we also explore other novel applications of the global satellite SO2
measurements. These include analysis of the effects of large earthquakes on volcanic degassing, and investigation
of the incidence and timescales of increased SO2 emissions prior to volcanic eruptions. This putative ‘pre-eruptive’
degassing is often the main justiﬁcation for volcanic gas monitoring, but there have been few comprehensive studies
of its occurrence.

