Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-10859, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Extreme weather, digital media, and big data: following communication
trails to investigate urban communities resilience

Rosa Vicari (1), Alexandre Delanoë (2), Ioulia Tchiguirinskaia (1), and Daniel Schertzer (1)
(1) Ecole des Ponts ParisTech, HM&CO, France , (2) Institut des Systèmes Complexes Paris Île-de-France, France

Nowadays when extreme weather affects a urban area, huge amounts of digital data are spontaneously produced
by the local community on the Internet. These “digital trails” can provide an insight on the interactions existing
between climate related risks and the social perception of these risks. This research aims at testing how unstruc-
tured Big Data exploration techniques can be employed to monitor these interactions and assess their impact on
a city resilience. More speciﬁcally, advanced text mining and network representation are used in this work to
investigate digital communication patterns in terms of communication frequency, the audience size, as well as the
quality of communications, i.e. if disseminated information is understood and accepted.

Four corpora of Web communications data related to urban ﬂood events were extracted: press news cover-
ing the June 2016 Seine River ﬂood; press news covering the October 2015 Alpes-Maritimes ﬂood; tweets on the
Seine River ﬂood; 2003-2017 Public Authorities documents on climate related risk management strategies in Paris
Region. The analysis of the corpora involved an iteration between manual and automated extraction of hundreds
of key-terms, network representations based on key-terms co-occurrences, automated cluster visualisation based
on adjacency matrix. Visual observation of the network coupled to quantitative analysis of its nodes and edges
allowed to obtain an in-depth understanding of the most prominent topics and actors, as well as of the connections
and clusters that characterise each corpus.

Through a comparison of the four corpora, it was possible to observe how these patterns change in the
context of two different weather extreme events, in a short term perspective (in the journalistic and the social
media spheres) and in a long term perspective (in the policy making sphere).
These analysis illustrate that digital research can bring out the most debated issues in a community, identify the
stakeholders that have the capacity to inﬂuence the public opinion and the community attitudes towards an issue,
policy, project or action. If the analysis is repeated at different time scales and in many locations, it is possible to
examine how social construction of reality evolves over time and in various urban contexts. This approach allows
to make the link between a short term assessment that focuses on crisis information management and a long term
assessment that apprehends the slow evolution of collective memory and representation of climate related threats.

This research involved a collaboration with Institut de Syste`mes Complexes Paris Île-de-France and it was
supported by Veolia in the framework of the Chair Hydrology for Resilient Cities.

