Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-17978-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Remote monitoring of impending outburst ﬂoods at Kyagar Glacier,
Chinese Karokoram

Vanessa Round (1,2), Silvan Leinss (3), Matthias Huss (2,4), Christoph Haemmig (5), Daniel Farinotti (1,2)
(1) Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow and Landscape Research (WSL), Birmensdorf, Switzerland, (2) Laboratory of
Hydraulics, Hydrology and Glaciology (VAW), ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, (3) Institute of Environmental Engineering,
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, (4) Department of Geosciences, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland, (5)
GEOTEST AG., Zollikofen, Switzerland

The recent period of active surging at Kyagar Glacier, in the Chinese Karakoram, has led to a situation in which
large glacier outburst ﬂoods occur. The rapid ﬂow of ice to the terminus of the glacier caused more than 60m thick-
ening of an ice dam which blocks the Keleqin River. Although the glacier is remotely located, more than 500km
upstream of major settlements, outburst of the glacier dammed lake poses a threat to over 1 million inhabitants and
signiﬁcant infrastructure downstream. Monitoring stations on the river downstream of Kyagar Glacier can provide
up to 22 hours warning once an outburst ﬂood is on the way, but remote sensing is currently the only method of
assessing the hazard potential before it occurs.
A combination of radar (Sentinel-1A) and optical (Sentinel-2, Planet) satellite products are used for assessing the
volume of the lake as it forms through the season. We also create a time series of digital elevation models with
single pass InSAR TanDEM-X data, to determine how the surface elevation of the ice dam and hence the maximal
potential volume of the lake evolves. Glacier surface velocity is determined through offset tracking, applied to both
optical and radar images, to assess the surge status of the glacier and potential for further raising or lowering of the
ice dam.
The spontaneous outburst ﬂoods in 2015 and 2016, exceeding total volumes of 40, and 50 million m3 respectively,
were signiﬁcantly smaller than the largest recorded outburst volume of almost 150 Mio m3 in 1999. However
an analysis of the ice-dam height evolution shows that the potential lake volume increased since 2016. In the
most recent summer of 2017, the lake volume reached around 90 Mio m3. Unexpectedly, this large lake didn’t
drain in one sudden event as observed in previous years, but through two less hazardous partial outbursts. In
this contribution we present an analysis of the most recent outburst ﬂoods and provide an outlook for the hazard
potential in the coming years.

