Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-12440, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

In situ detection of microbial fossils on planetary bodies by combined
laser mass spectrometry and optical microscopy

Reto Wiesendanger (1,7), Peter Wurz (1), Marek Tulej (1), David Wacey (2), Anna Neubeck (3), Valentine
Grimaudo (4), Andreas Riedo (5), Pavel Moreno (4), Alena Cedeno Lopez (4), and Magnus Ivarsson (6)
(1) Space Research & Planetary Sciences, University of Bern, Sidlerstrasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland
(reto.wiesendanger@space.unibe.ch), (2) Centre for Microscopy Characterisation and Analysis, The University of Western
Australia, Perth, WA 6009, Australia, (3) Department of Geological Sciences, Stockholm University, Sweden, (4) Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Interfacial Electrochemistry Group, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, (5) Sackler
Laboratory for Astrophysics, Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, The Netherlands., (6) 5Department of Paleobiology and
Nordic Centre for Earth Evolution, Swedish Museum of Natural History, Stockholm, Sweden., (7) Microsystems for Space
Technologies Laboratory, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale Lausanne, Rue de la Maladière 71b, Neuchâtel, Switzerland

The in-situ detection of fossilised forms of microbial life on planetary bodies requires thorough analysis of the
chemistry, mineralogy, and morphology of the putative fossil and its host. We developed a dedicated instrument
suite that fulﬁls the severe requirements of space ﬂight as well as the scientiﬁc performance for such an endeavour
with high accuracy and reliability. The suite consists of a high vacuum compatible microscope with micrometre
resolution and a mass spectrometer able to detect trace elements down to the ppb level with permill accuracy. The
instrument suite is designed to ﬁt on typical planetary landers. We built a ﬂight prototype and we will present its
architecture and design features, as well as its key performance factors.
Using the 1.9 billion year old gunﬂint chert as an analogue sample, we demonstrate how different types of
microbial fossils and the host regions on the sample can be distinguished and selected for chemical analysis. We
will present the results of the chemical and imaging analysis of the selected locations and assign the sampled
locations to known groups of fossilized bacteria.

