Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13983, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Predicting key agronomic soil properties with ﬂuorescence spectroscopy
combined with reﬂectance spectroscopy: a farm-scale study in a
Mediterranean viticultural agroecosystem

Emmanuelle Vaudour (1), Zoran G. Cerovic (2), Dav M. Ebengo (1,3), and Gwendal Latouche (2)
(1) UMR ECOSYS, AgroParisTech, INRA, Université Paris-Saclay, 78850, THIVERVAL-GRIGNON, France
(emmanuelle.vaudour@agroparistech.fr), (2) UMR 8079, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Laboratoire
Ecologie, Systématique et Evolution, 91405 Orsay cédex, France, (3) Förderverein Uni Kinshasa
(www.foerderverein-uni-kinshasa.de)

For adequate crop and soil management, rapid, accurate techniques for monitoring soil properties are particularly
decisive when a farmer starts up his activities and needs a diagnosis of his cultivated ﬁelds. This study aimed
to evaluate the potential of ﬂuorescence spectroscopy performed on whole soil solid samples, for predicting key
soil properties at the scale of a Mediterranean 6 ha-wine estate with contrasted soils. Fluorescence measurements
were carried out using the portable non-contact hand-held multiple excitation ﬂuorescence sensor (Multiplex,
FORCE-A, Orsay, France) in conjunction with reﬂectance measurements in the Vis-NIR-SWIR range.
Combining Vis-NIR-SWIR reﬂectance spectra and a set of ﬂuorescence signals enabled to improve the power
of prediction of a number of key agronomic soil properties including SOC, Ntot, CaCO3, iron and particle-size
contents (clay, ﬁne silt, ﬁne sand, coarse sand), CEC, pH and exchangeable Ca, K and Mg, with cross-validation
RPD ≥2 and R2≥0.75.
Predictions of SOC, Ntot, CaCO3, iron contents, pH, were still good (RPD ≥ 1.8, R2 ≥ 0.68) when using a
single ﬂuorescence signal such as SFR_R or FERARI indices, highlighting the unexpected importance of red
excitations and indices derived from plant studies. The predictive ability of single ﬂuorescence indices or original
signals was very signiﬁcant for topsoil: this is very important for a farmer who wishes to update information
on soil nutrient for the purpose of fertility diagnosis and particularly nitrogen fertilization. These results open
encouraging perspectives for using miniaturized ﬂuorescence devices enabling red excitation coupled with red or
far-red ﬂuorescence emissions, directly in the ﬁeld.

This work was supported by the wine Estate Domaine des Chauvets (Vinsobres cru) and by the French
Space Agency (CNES) through the TOSCA-PLEIADES-CO project.

