Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-7133-2, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The COST Action "Origin and Evolution of Life on Earth and in the
Universe": An interdisciplinary research, training and outreach effort

Muriel Gargaud (1), Wolf Geppert (2), John Brucato (3), Elias Chatzitheorides (4), David Dunér (5), Ján Hrušák
(6), Emmanuelle Javaux (7), Zuzana Kanuchova (8), Terence Kee (9), Akos Kereszturi (10), Puriﬁcación
López-García (11), Anna Losiak (12), Christophe Malatere (13), Nigel Mason (14), Riho Motlep (15), Lena
Noack (16), Olga Prieto-Ballesteros (17), Ewa Szuszkiewicz (18), Inge Loes ten Kate (19), and Ján Žabka (6)
(1) Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de Bordeaux, Université de Bordeaux, Pessac, France (Muriel.Gargaud@u-bordeaux.fr), (2)
Stockholm University, Physics Department, Stockholm University Astrobiology Center, Stockholm, Sweden
(wgeppert@fysik.su.se), (3) Astrophysical Observatory of Arcetri, Firenze, Italy (jbrucato@arcetri.astro.it), (4) Department of
Geological Sciences, National Technical University of Athens, Greece (eliasch@metal.ntua.gr), (5) History of Science and
Ideas, Lund University, Lund, Sweden (david.duner@kultur.lu.se), (6) J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical chemistry, Czech
Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic (hrusak@kav.cas.cz), (7) Département de Géologie, Université de Liège,
Liège, Belgium (ej.javaux@uliege.be ), (8) Astronomical Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Tatranska Lomnica, Slovak
Republic (pipovci@gmail.com), (9) School of Chemistry, University of Leeds, UK (T.P.Kee@leeds.ac.uk), (10) Research
Centre for Astronomy and Earth Sciences, Budapest, Hungary (kereszturiakos@gmail.com), (11) Evolution et Systématique
Laboratoire ESE; Université Paris-Sud, Orsay, France (puri.lopez@u-psud.fr), (12) Wild Fire Lab, University of Exeter, UK
(a.i.losiak@exeter.ac.uk), (13) Département de philosophie Université du Québec à Montréal
(malaterre.christophe@uqam.ca), (14) School of Physical Sciences, Open University, Milton Keynes, UK
(nigel.mason@open.ac.uk), (15) Geoloogian Osakond, Tartu Ülikool, Tartu, Estonia (riho.motlep@ut.ee), (16) Institute of
Geological Sciences. Freie Universität Berlin, Germany (lena.noack@fu-berlin.de ), (17) Centro de Astrobiología,
CSIC-INTA, Madrid Spain (prietobo@cab.inta-csic.es), (18) Institute of Physics, University of Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland
(szusz@univ.szczecin.pl), (19) Department of Earth Sciences, Universiteit Utrecht, The Netherlands (I.L.tenKate@uu.nl)

The COST Action ”Origins of Life on Earth and in the Universe” (2014-2018) is a multidisciplinary network
involving around 170 researchers (many of them early career investigators) from 30 European countries.

Research activities are coordinated by ﬁve working groups:
• Understanding the formation and evolution of planetary systems and habitable planets
• Searching for the origins of the building blocks of Life
• Tracing the origin of life on Earth and ﬁnding its limits
• Detecting life on other planets and its satellites
• History and philosophy of science.

Also, two teams: “Education and Training” and “Outreach and Dissemination” existed. Efforts of the Working
Groups resulted in numerous peer-reviewed papers of which many were a direct result of >80 short term scientiﬁc
missions funded by the Action. The bridging between natural sciences and humanities initiated by WG5 led to an
international conference, a summer school and a White paper entitled “Astrobiology and Society in Europe Today”.

The Action has organised four major international conferences:

“Habitability in the Universe: From the Early Earth to Exoplanets”, Porto(PT), 2015
“From star and planet formation to early Life”, Vilnius(LT), 2016,
“Early Earth and exo-Earths: origin and evolution of life”, Warsaw (PL), 2017
“Life on Earth and beyond: emergence, survivability and impact on the environment”, Bertinoro(IT), 2018

Between these events, thematic workshops were held:

“Missions to Habitable Worlds”, Budapest(HU), 2015
“Evolution of chemical complexity”, Liblice(CZ), 2016
EGU Galileo Conference “Geosciences for the Understanding of Habitability in the Solar System and Beyond”,
Azores(PT), 2017

Altogether, eight interdisciplinary training schools were organised by the action and mostly held at geolog-
ically interesting sites (Iceland, Karelia, Saaremaa, Azores, La Palma). They involved “real science” ﬁeld work
and attracted many early career researchers from different countries. The events received excellent feedback from
participants. These schools inspired several teams of young scientists to perform follow-up expeditions leading
to new cooperations and interesting scientiﬁc results. In addition, the Action supported the training schools
“Rencontres Exobio pour Doctorants” covering the basics of astrobiology and obtained recognition by the IAU
in 2016. Action members also successfully started an Erasmus+ strategic partnership “European Astrobiology
Campus” devoted to optimising training in the ﬁeld.

Two large-scale dissemination projects were carried out:
• Publication of the second edition of the “Encyclopaedia of Astrobiology” containing 3000 entries by more than
350 authors (many of them Action participants) and preparation of the third edition.
• Design and translation into several languages of a travelling exhibition “River of Time” tracing the main stages
of the history of our planet from the formation of the solar system until the emergence and diversiﬁcation of life.

The Action has also created several scientiﬁc databases, e.g. on biosignatures and pseudo-signatures and
the reconstruction of the Martian paleoenvironment. Finally, another ongoing major networking effort is the
preparation to launch a European Astrobiology Institute providing a long-term sustainable structure for the
European Astrobiology community.

