Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-14612, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

How to evaluate the surface heat loss and closely follow the evolution of
solphataric activity by integrating satellite data and ground
measurements to the thermal monitoring of a closed conduit: The case of
the active crater at La Fossa (Island of Vulcano, Italy)

Malvina Silvestri, Iole Serena Diliberto, Federico Rabufﬁ, Maria Fabrizia Buongiorno, Antonio Fabio Pisciotta,
and Massimo Musacchio
Istituto Nazionale di Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia (INGV), (malvina.silvestri@ingv.it)

The aim of volcanic surveillance is to interpret the observational data in order to highlight changes of activity
and possibly to deﬁne the risks for human health and activities. Current satellite missions, providing imagery
in the TIR region at high spatial resolution, offer to volcanic surveillance the possibility to estimate the surface
temperature and highlight surface changes, related to the buried energy sources. Actually the remote sensing
allows repeating the acquisitions in time, with a more convenient cost to beneﬁt ratio, than the direct surveys could
do. Moreover, thanks to the widest areal coverage provided by satellite images, remote sensing dataare able to
identify the areal changes of thermal anomalies all over the volcanic system.. As regards the Island of Vulcano, the
acquisition from LANDSAT and from ASTER (NASA-TERRA), provide thermal data by IR channels, to monitor
the evolution of the surface temperatures on the cone.
The La Fossa cone of Vulcano (Aeolian Arc) has been monitored by the INGV observational network, since
the eighties. The geochemical network, includes, beside many other monitored parameters, also the output
temperature of high temperature fumaroles located on the summit crater. The historical thermal monitoring has
been based on contact sensor, either in the fumaroles (maximum measured temperature ∼670 ◦C) and in the steam
heated areas (maximum measured temperature ∼100 ◦C). Within the steam heated ground, the INGV monitoring
system consists in a data-logger storing the ground temperature at ﬁxed time interval (1 h) on 4 points, lying along
the main direction of diffuse heat ﬂux on a shallow vertical proﬁle of soil.
In this work analysis and the comparison of about twenty years of nighttime satellite data and twenty-ﬁve years of
ground measurements are presented. The choice to process only nighttime satellite data is due to not presence of
the solar contamination and the obtained temperature has acceptable values in the normal ground surface heated
only by the sun radiation. This long term monitoring of high temperature fumaroles holds a good potential to
improve the interpretation of many surface phenomena occurring in any active volcanic area.
To improve the systematic use of satellite data in the monitor procedures of Volcanic Observatories a suitable
integration and validation strategy is needed, also considering that current satellite missions do not provide TIR
data with optimal characteristics to observe small thermal anomalies that may indicate changes in the volcanic
activity.
For example, to observe small thermal anomalies and also to detect the effect of different moisture contents on
a short optical path (about 1m), proximal IR thermo-camera images of the fumarole ﬁels have been taken at
different times (during daytime and nighttime), and the results have been compared. The analysis of data by
proximal IR thermo-camera images could supply either an intermediate observational scale. Moreover they would
provide also an intermediate instrumental resolution between the ground measurements by contact sensors and in-
direct remote sensing data by satellite monitoring, to get comparison of results and validation strategies, more easy.

