Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-7295, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Characterization of the diabatic processes within the warm conveyor belt
of a North Atlantic extratropical cyclone observed during NAWDEX

Nicolas Blanchard (1), Jean-Pierre Chaboureau (1), and Julien Delanoë (2)
(1) Laboratoire d’Aérologie, CNRS, University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France (jean-pierre.chaboureau@aero.obs-mip.fr), (2)
LATMOS-IPSL, CNRS/INSU, University Versailles St-Quentin, Guyancourt, France (julien.delanoe@latmos.ipsl.fr)

Extratropical cyclones (ETCs) result from a complex chain of interactions between large-scale dynamic forcings
and mesoscale physical processes. Among them, diabatic processes are recognized to be a source of errors on
the location and chronology of intense precipitations and strong gusts. These errors come in part from the poor
representation of diabatic processes in numerical weather prediction models. This is particularly the case in the
Warm Conveyor Belts (WCBs) where diabatic processes are the most signiﬁcant. WCB is an ascending air mass
carrying a signiﬁcant ﬂow of moisture from the subtropical low levels to the high layers of mid-latitudes. The
ascending air releases heat in the middle troposphere, which modiﬁes the atmospheric circulation both in the
lower and upper layers.

Here, the diabatic processes are investigated for an ETC observed on October 2, 2016 during NAWDEX
(North Atlantic Waveguide and Downstream Impact EXperiment). Two ﬂights of the SAFIRE (Service des
Avions Français Instrumentés pour la Recherche en Environnement) Falcon-20 carrying the RASTA (Radar
Airborne System Tool for Atmosphere) radar were carried out through the WCB associated to the ETC. A
convection-permitting simulation (∆x=2.5 km) was run with the Meso-NH model, in order to resolve explicitly
convection within the WCB. The radar reﬂectivity proﬁles thus measured as well as the MSG (Meteosat Second
Generation) brightness temperatures are well reproduced by the simulation. The budget of water vapor and
potential temperature was calculated along the WCB trajectories. This conﬁrms that heating by condensation and
by deposition of water vapor on ice crystals dominate in the WCB. As shown by a potential vorticity assessment
at the tropopause level, this heating contributes to reinforcing the anticyclonic circulation in the WCB output ﬂow.
To further evaluate the representation of diabatic processes and their impact on the ETC development, a coarser
simulation in which the deep convection is parameterized (∆x=10 km) was run. It produces less precipitation
exceeding 5 mm h-1 below the WCB than the high resolution simulation. The surface winds and the jet stream
were also weaker. This study shows the necessity to explicitly represent the diabatic processes in ETCs.

