Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-684, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Soniﬁcation and Citizen Science: New Tools for Magnetospheric ULF
Wave Research?

Martin Archer (1), Michael Hartinger (2), Robert Redmon (3), Vassilis Angelopoulos (4), Robert Clauer (2), and
Rico Belhke (5)
(1) Queen Mary University of London, School of Physics and Astronomy, London, United Kingdom
(m.archer10@imperial.ac.uk), (2) Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA, (3) National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Boulder, Colorado, USA, (4) University of California, Los Angeles, California,
USA, (5) Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark

Soniﬁcation, the process of converting an oscillatory time-series into audible sound, is a technique little used in
space physics but offers effective navigation, mining, and analysis of large datasets. Such a technique not only
enables researchers to gain broader insights into the data but also lends itself well to citizen science.

A pilot demonstrating this saw soniﬁed GOES (which often maps near to the auroral oval during disturbed
times) magnetometer data being released to London schools as part of exploratory projects. This technique differs
from typical citizen science projects which tend to be more prescriptive. We present a case study identiﬁed by
school students via this approach of novel long-lasting narrowband decreasing-frequency standing Alfvén waves
over multiple days. It was found that this event occurred during the recovery phase of a geomagnetic storm where,
through simultaneous plasma density measurements by the THEMIS spacecraft, the decreasing frequencies were
due to the reﬁlling of the plasmasphere following the storm. Further exploration of the audio revealed similar
events following other major storms.

Finally, we present preliminary multi-instrument soniﬁcation of conjugate high-latitude ground magnetometers
for interhemispheric comparisons of ULF wave phenomena. Two events are presented during similar solar wind
driving conditions but under different ionospheric conductivity conﬁgurations (one was near solstice and the other
near equinox).

We therefore highlight the potential of soniﬁcation and citizen science in tackling the “zoo” of ULF wave
phenomena in the auroral oval, polar cap and nearby regions of Earth’s magnetosphere-ionosphere system.

