Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-13469, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Further strategy for lightning hunt in Venus with Akatsuki/LAC

Yukihiro Takahashi, Mitsuteru Sato, and Masataka Imai
Hokkaido University, Graduate School of Science, Department of Cosmosciences, Sapporo, Japan (spriteselves@gmail.com)

LAC, lightning and airglow camera, on board Akatsuki spacecraft, a Japanese Venus climate orbiter, is the ﬁrst
sensor optimized for the lightning ﬂash detection in planets other than the Earth so that it can identify the optical
ﬂash caused by electrical discharge in the atmosphere of Venus. It is expected that LAC could conclude the 30-year
discussion on the existence of lightning in Venus. Unique performance of LAC compared to other equipments used
in the previous studies of Venus is the high-speed sampling rate at 20 kHz with 32 pixels of Avalanche Photo Diode
(APD) matrix, enabling us to distinguish the optical lightning ﬂash from other pulsing noises, including cosmic
ray. We selected OI 777 nm line for lightning detection, which is expected to be the most prominent emission in
CO2-dominant atmosphere based on the laboratory experiments.
The regular operation of LAC for lightning hunt was started on December 1, 2016. Due to the elongated orbit than
that planned originally, we have an umbra for approximately 30 min to observe the lightning ﬂash in the night side
of Venus every 10 days, which is almost 1/20 rate of the original plan. The triggering parameter was set so as to
optimize for the light curve similar to the normal lightning in the Earth and data obtained totally for about 4 hours
were examined. However, we couldn’t ﬁnd any lightning signals so far. Adding to this triggering parameter set, we
added two more sets, optimized for sprite type emission with duration of up to 10s ms and for blue jets or meteor
type emission with duration of about 100s ms. These three sets are in rotation at every 20 sec. Furthermore, in order
to investigate fainter emissions, we are conducting successive force triggering recordings without any threshold.
Here we report the detailed strategy and the latest status of the LAC observation after the winter campaign in 2018.

