Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-14745, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Modelling soil Organic Carbon and mineral composition using reﬂectance
and emissivity data

Veronika Kopaˇcková (1), Jan Jelének (1), Lucie Koucká (1), Kateˇrina Fárová (1), and Miroslav Pikl (2)
(1) Czech Geological Survey, Remote sensing, Czech Republic (veronika.kopackova@seznam.cz), (2) Global Change
Research Institute CAS - CzechGlobe, Belidla 986/4a, Brno, Czech Republic

Conventional laboratory analysis such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), silicate analysis and organic carbon (OC) are
time-consuming and expensive. On the other hand, soil spectroscopy has shown to be a fast and reproducible
technique that has been increasingly used for rapid, non-destructive and cost-effective soil analyses. In this
study, optical (reﬂectance) and thermal (emissivity) soil spectroscopy was employed to soil proﬁle samples
that represent the all major variability in forest soils in the Czech Republic (the soil samples taken from all the
horizons down to 80-cm depth were utilized). Optical spectral libraries were collected using a Spectral Evolution
spectrometer (SR 2500, 0.4-2.5 µm), in order to normalize and align these spectral measurements taken during the
summer 2016 the internal soil standard (ISS) concept, in which a soil standard sample exhibiting stable spectral
performance was used. The emissivity spectra for selected soil samples were acquired in September 2017 using
a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR, 8-14 µm) spectrometer. The reﬂectance and emissivity data of soil proﬁles
together with mineral (XRD) and geochemical analysis were used to model the soil mineral compositions when
focusing on the relationship between phyllosilicate composition and Organic Carbon (OC). Furthermore, soil
reﬂectance/emissivity data were resampled to a spectral resolution of the following satellite sensors – WorldView3,
Sentinel-2, EnMap and HispIRI – and potential capability of using these new-generation satellite data to model
OC and soil mineral composition is further discussed.
Acknowledgements: presented research has been conducted under the support of Czech Science Foundation (grant
17-05743S) and the Ministry of Education Youth and Sports (8G15004).

