Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-3929, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Modeling scale coupling in space turbulence

Giovanni Lapenta, Kirit Makwana, Francesco Pucci, Maria Elena Innocenti, and Diego Gonzalez-Herrero
KU Leuven, Wiskunde, Wiskunde, Leuven, Belgium (giovanni.lapenta@wis.kuleuven.be)

Modelling space, astrophysical and laboratory plasmas requires us to consider ﬂuid and kinetic models together.
Often ﬂuid models cannot capture completely some microscopic aspects. For example, there are aspects of
shocks and reconnection processes that cannot be described by ﬂuid models completely. A striking example is the
two-way coupling between particles and waves: waves energize particles and unstable particle distributions cause
instabilities. Fluid models can capture some aspects but kinetic models are needed for a complete description.
Conversely, kinetic models are too expensive to model large scales.
We report our efforts centered on bridging this gap. The central glue used is the implicit moment method. By
introducing the moments of the distribution functions and by formulating the discretization implicitly, we allow
the kinetic model to morph into a ﬂuid model, at large scales. The latest development in our effort is to introduce
a description of the ﬁrst order moment (current) via a mass-matrix. The mass matrix is a mathematical construct
that summarizes the plasma response.
The advantage of the new approach is to be practical at all scales: we showed one example where the same kinetic
model covers nearly 20 orders of magnitude in temporal and spatial scales. Additionally, energy is conserved
exactly, a feature of physical relevance and a powerful aid to avoid numerical instabilities.

[1] Lapenta, G. (2017). Exactly energy conserving semi-implicit particle in cell formulation. Journal of
Computational
Physics, 334, 349-366.

[2] Lapenta, G., Gonzalez-Herrero, D., & Boella, E. (2017). Multiple-scale kinetic simulations with the
energy conserving semi-implicit particle in cell method. Journal of Plasma Physics, 83(2).

