Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-6154, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Utilization of the LADAS model within Emergency Response Systems in
Korea

Kihyun Park, Byung-Il Min, Sora Kim, and Kyung-Suk Suh
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Environmental Safety Research Team, Daejeon, Korea, Republic Of
(khpark77@kaeri.re.kr)

The Lagrangian Atmospheric Dose Assessment System (LADAS) is an atmospheric transport and dispersion
model (ATDM) which has been developed at the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI) for the pur-
pose of predicting and assessing atmospheric dispersion of radionuclides released into the air by a nuclear acci-
dent. During past several years, the LADAS model has been applied to the environmental impact assessment for
the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster and the tracking of North Korea’s nuclear tests. Currently, it plays an im-
portant role as a primary ATDM of the Radiological Accident Preparedness System in Korea (RAPS-K) operated
by the KAERI. Recently, we have developed a Volcanic Ash Transport and Dispersion Model (VATDM) called
LADAS-Volcanic Ash (LADAS-VA) based on the LADAS-regional model. The LADAS-VA model is chosen as
a one of VATDMs with the FALL3D and PUFF models which are utilized within the Volcanic Disaster Response
System against volcanic eruption around Korea now under construction by the ministry of the interior and safety
of Korean government. Operation of these emergency response systems is partly supported by the Korea Mete-
orological Administration (KMA) with providing the real-time Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) data. The
LADAS and LADAS-VA models are optimized for fast (initial assessment) calculation to support decision-making
of immediate countermeasures when an emergency situation occurs. Early stage environmental impact and damage
prediction are estimated base on the result of this calculation. Here we present how the LADAS and LADAS-VA
models are utilized within emergency response systems in Korea.

