Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-7574, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Energy exchange and electron dynamics in kinetic Alfvén waves

Daniel J. Gershman (1), Adolfo F-Viñas (1), John C. Dorelli (1), Levon A. Avanov (1), Scott A. Boardsen (1),
Paul M. Bellan (2), Steven J. Schwartz (3), Benoit Lavraud (4), Victoria N. Coffey (5), Michael O. Chandler (5),
Yoshifumi Saito (6), William R. Paterson (1), Stephen A. Fuselier (7), Robert E. Ergun (8), Robert J. Strangeway
(9), Christopher T. Russell (9), Craig J. Pollock (1), Roy B. Torbert (10), and James L. Burch (7)
(1) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA, (2) Division of Engineering and Applied Science, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena CA, USA, (3) Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK, (4)
Institut de Recherche en Astrophysique et Planétologie, Université de Toulouse, France , (5) NASA Marshall Space Flight
Center, Huntsville, AL, USA, (6) JAXA Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-5210,
Japan, (7) Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, USA, (8) Astrophysical and Planetary Sciences, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA, (9) Department of Earth, Planetary, and Space Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA, (10) Physics Department, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, USA

The Alfvén wave is a ubiquitous wave mode that transports energy throughout Earth’s space environment and be-
yond. At kinetic scales, this wave provides a critical mechanism for the transfer of energy between charged parti-
cles and electromagnetic ﬁelds. The small inter-spacecraft separation and high time resolution measurements from
NASA’s Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) mission have enabled unprecedented study of these, and other funda-
mental wave modes. We present observations of a monochromatic kinetic Alfvén wave packet measured in a re-
connection exhaust in Earth’s magnetopause boundary layer. Parallel current density and pressure-gradient-driven
electric ﬁeld ﬂuctuations that were 90 degrees out of phase with one another indicated stable wave propagation and
energy transport throughout the exhaust. We found a signiﬁcant population of trapped electrons in the kinetic-scale
magnetic mirror formed between successive wave peaks. These particles, which accounted for nearly half of the
density ﬂuctuations within the wave, provided an unexpected mechanism for maintaining quasi-neutrality. Finally,
we demonstrate the capability of MMS to recover the underlying dispersion relation of broadband ﬂuctuations
observed in Earth’s space environment, providing new insights into the transport of energy across boundaries in
collisionless plasmas.

