Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-7036-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Prototype of multi-hazard early warning from EUNADICS-AV systems to
trigger model forecasts of European airspace

Hugues Brenot (1), Nicolas Theys (1), Lieven Clarisse (2), Daniel Hurtmans (3), Pascal Hedelt (3), Margarita
Vasquez (3), Lucia Mona (4), Gelsomina Pappalardo (4), Simona Scollo (5), Mauro Coltelli (5), Tuomas Peltonen
(6), Juhani Lahtinen (6), Marcus Hirtl (7), Delia Arnold (7), Timo Virtanen (8), Gerrit de Leeuw (8), Guðrún Nína
Petersen (9), Sara Barsotti (9), Matthieu Plu (10), Gerhard Wotawa (7), and the EUNADICS-AV WP5 team
(1) Royal Belgian Institute for Space Aeronomy (BIRA), Belgium, (2) Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Belgium, (3)
Deutsches Zentrum für Luft-und Raumfahrt (DLR), Germany, (4) Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Italy, (5)
Instituto Nazionale di Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia (INGV), Italy, (6) Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority (STUK), Finland,
(7) Zentralanstalt für Meteorologie und Geodynamik (ZAMG), Austria, (8) Finnish Meteorological Institute (FMI), Finland,
(9) Icelandic Meteorological Ofﬁce (IMO), Iceland, (10) CNRM, UMR 3589, Météo-France/CNRS, France

Aviation is one of the most critical infrastructures of the 21st century. In Europe, safe ﬂight operations, air trafﬁc
management (ATM) and air trafﬁc control (ATC) are the shared responsibilities of EUROCONTROL, national
authorities, airlines and pilots. The common goal of all stakeholders is to warrant and maintain the safety of ﬂight
crews and passengers. However, there is still currently a signiﬁcant gap in the availability of real-time monitor-
ing/modelling of airborne hazards. The main objective of the Horizon 2020 project EUNADICS-AV (European
Natural Airborne Disaster Information and Coordination System for Aviation; http://www.eunadics.eu) is to close
this gap in data availability, enabling all stakeholders in the aviation system to obtain fast, coherent, and consistent
information.
This study reports on WP5 of EUNADICS-AV, showing the development of a prototype multi-hazard monitor-
ing and early warning system. For this task, improved near real-time retrievals from satellite and ground-based
platforms (maximum delay of a few hours), are used in order to detect and send notiﬁcation of volcanic ash
and SO2 plumes, sandstorms, dust clouds, aerosols produced from forest ﬁres, and radioactive plumes. to facili-
tate the required information to trigger atmospheric transport and dispersion model forecasts/analyses aiming at
demonstrating the added-value of integrating observed aerosols/radionuclide data for selected case crises affecting
European air space. An example of the chain of actions, from retrievals to triggering and modelling is shown.

