Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-9541, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

The ARISTOTLE Multi-Hazard Expert Advice System for ERCC
preparedness actions

Alberto Michelini (1), Gerhard Wotawa (2), Delia Arnold-Arias (2), Gavin Iley (3), Giovanna Forlenza (1), and
the ARISTOTLE Consortium
(1) Istituto Nazionale Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia, Centro Nazionale Terremoti, Roma, Italy (alberto.michelini@ingv.it), (2)
Zentralanstalt für Meteorologie und Geodynamik, Vienna, Austria (gerhard.wotawa@zamg.ac.at), (3) Met Ofﬁce Fitzroy
Road Exeter Devon EX1 3PB United Kingdom (gavin.iley@metofﬁce.gov.uk)

The utilisation of multi-hazard information across the Disaster Risk Management Cycle has proven to be important
but poses many challenges when a robust operational system needs to be implemented. The European Commis-
sion’s Emergency Response and Coordination Centre (ERCC) of the European Commission’s Directorate-General
for Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection (DG-ECHO) is tasked with coordinating the response to crisis of
EU Member States within Europe and also, as necessary, globally. Such task requires the processing of a large
array of information with the primary goal of assessing rapidly the gravity of the crisis situation. To reduce such
analytical load, in 2015 the DG-ECHO issued a tender pilot project to develop a multi-hazard advisory service
for natural hazards. The ARISTOTLE Consortium, with 15 partner institutions (11 from EU Countries; 2 from
non-EU countries and 2 European organizations) operating in the Meteorological and Geophysical domains, was
selected and since then it has been working to overcome the many challenges of designing, building and running
a multi-hazard advisory service for ERCC with information and expert assessment and advice with respect to
ﬂooding, earthquakes, severe weather, volcanic emissions and tsunamis.

Within the ﬁrst year of ARISTOTLE, an operational multi-hazard advisory service was designed in all its
components. In the second year, the service was deployed and entered into full operations at the beginning of
2017. The service focuses on the power of sharing information between the experts all belonging to national
operational centers in the corresponding hazards. The service offered relies on an underpinning IT platform
that gathers information automatically from available global and local hazard services as basis upon which
the expert assessment is built-up and then delivered to ERCC both verbally and as reports. The system, with
routine and emergency modes, has reached maturity within this year and provided advice into the ERCC for 37
emergencies (by December, 2017) covering all the aforementioned hazards. The presentation will illustrate the
basic components of the ARISTOTLE 24*7 advisory service, its modes of operations and lessons learnt within
the one year operational phase.

