Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-3079, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Past, present and future states of the ozone layer

Wolfgang Steinbrecht
Deutscher Wetterdienst, Met. Obs. Hohenpeissenberg, Hohenpeissenberg, Germany (wolfgang.steinbrecht@dwd.de)

The Montreal protocol and its later amendments were successful. Concentrations of ozone-depleting substances
(ODS) have been declining in the troposphere since 1994, in the stratosphere since the late 1990s. The previous
decline of ozone has been stopped by about 2000. Since then, ODS have been declining and ozone increases are
observed in the upper stratosphere. Recent studies indicate that the Antarctic ozone hole is also getting smaller.
However, clear signs of increases in total column ozone are not observed so far. This is not unexpected, because
the decline of ODS is three to four times slower than their previous increase, and because natural ozone variations,
especially those due to meteorological ﬂuctuations from year to year, mask the relatively small chemical ozone
recovery signal. Signiﬁcant recovery of total ozone columns is not expected before 2020 to 2040.
While ODS and their importance for the ozone layer should decline over the next 50 to 70 years, model simulations
indicate that emissions of greenhouse gases, especially CO2, N2O and CH4, will become more and more impor-
tant. Their effects on ozone could be as large as past ozone depletion due to ODS (outside of the ozone hole). CO2
warms the troposphere and cools the stratosphere. This affects climate and global transports of ozone and other
trace gases by the stratospheric Brewer Dobson Circulation. N2O and CH4 are greenhouse gases as well, but they
also affect ozone chemistry directly by releasing N Ox, CO, and H2O in the stratosphere. Generally, more N2O
will result in less ozone, more CO2 or CH4 in more ozone. However, the balance varies with latitude, altitude, and
depends on the unknown future concentrations. Large future increases in very-short lived chlorine and bromine
containing gases (e.g. CCl2H2) might also inﬂuence ozone.
The predicted acceleration of the global Brewer Dobson Circulation should increase ozone columns over most
of the globe, but reduce ozone columns over the tropics. Since ozone is a key player in the radiative balance,
these changes feed back into the circulation. Particularly in the lower stratosphere, we can expect a complex inter-
twining of ozone changes and the Brewer Dobson Circulation. Climate change and the evolution of the ozone
layer are, thus, intimately connected. Many of these processes are currently not well understood. Observational
evidence is also scarce, and is not conclusive. It is especially difﬁcult to compare decadal variations available from
the observations with the centennial changes predicted by the models. This is, however, very relevant for the future
of the ozone layer.

