Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-11401, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Deciphering land-atmosphere interactions of reactive nitrogen using
high-frequency isotope analysis

Emily M. Elliott (1), Lucy A. Rose (2), and Zhongjie Yu (1)
(1) University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania U.S.A., (2) University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota U.S.A.

Methodological advances in sample collection and isotopic analyses have facilitated an exponential increase in the
measurement of reactive nitrogen (N) isotopes in atmospheric systems. Despite rapid advances in our production of
new data, most prior studies have characterized NOx emission and NO−
3 deposition dynamics on seasonal, annual,
and longer time scales. In contrast, much less attention has focused on NO−
3 deposition dynamics over short time
scales (e.g., individual storm events). Because NOx emissions from certain sources, such as lightning and biogenic
emissions, are highly transient, improved characterization of N emission and deposition dynamics on episodic time
scales is needed to clarify the importance of these sources to atmospheric NO−
3 formation and deposition. Here we
examine, on episodic time scales, shifts in the isotopic composition of rainwater nitrate and soil derived NOx in
two separate case studies.
We coupled the triple isotopic composition of NO−
3 (δ15N, δ18O, and ∆17O) in hourly precipitation samples with
regional air mass back trajectory analysis to evaluate nitrate formation pathways, fractionation dynamics, and
NOx source contributions to precipitation NO−
3 at Fernow Experimental Forest (West Virginia, USA) during six
growing season storms. δ15N, δ18O, and ∆17O values in precipitation exhibited extreme variability, varying by up
to 16(cid:104) 26(cid:104) and 9(cid:104) respectively, over two hours during some events. The wide range of ∆17O-NO−
3 values
encompassed by the precipitation NO−
3 measured during these growing season storms, combined with the patterns
in δ15N and δ18O of NO−
3 over short time periods, demonstrate the dynamic nature of atmospheric NO−
3 formation
and deposition during storm events and the utility of triple nitrate isotopes for evaluating N deposition sources and
processes.
While soil NO emission is expected to be an important source driving the intra-precipitation variations of δ15N-
NO−
3 , δ15N of soil-emitted NO is notoriously hard to measure and predict due to the high chemical reactivity of
NO and the episodic and complex nature of soil NO-producing processes. Here we highlight a new NO collection
approach that is capable of collecting soil-emitted NO for δ15N analysis at time scale of minutes. Coupling this new
method with a dynamic ﬂux chamber system under both laboratory and ﬁeld conditions, we show that transient, but
pronounced variations in magnitude (up to nine-fold) and δ15N (up to 36%¸) of soil NO emission can be triggered
by rewetting dry soils using different N substrates. These results collectively demonstrate the promising potential
of high-frequency isotope analysis in characterizing the dynamic nature of soil NO emission, discerning microbial
processes governing pulse soil NO emissions, and ultimately elucidating the complex land-atmosphere interactions
of reactive N in natural and human-dominated ecosystems.

