Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-9642, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Development of a new seamless prediction system for very short range
convective-scale forecasting at Deutscher Wetterdienst

Ulrich Blahak, Kathrin Wapler, Marcus Paulat, Roland Potthast, Axel Seifert, Liselotte Bach, Elisabeth
Bauernschubert, Robert Feger, Kathrin Feige, Michael Hoff, Markus Junk, Alberto deLozar, Lisa Neef, Rafael
Posada, Martin Rempel, Markus Schultze, Chrsitian Welzenbacher, and Manuel Werner
Deutscher Wetterdienst, Offenbach, Germany (kathrin.wapler@dwd.de)

At Deutscher Wetterdienst (DWD) a pilot project has been set up to start the development of its future Seamless
INtegrated FOrecastiNg sYstem SINFONY. The aim is to develop a system for ensemble-based storm-scale
forecasting from observation time up to +6 h / +12 h forecasts, which integrates nowcasting techniques with
numerical model prediction (NWP) in a more or less seamless way. The focus of the pilot project is on severe
summertime convective events.

For the ﬁrst 2 h the storm-scale forecasting and warning relies mostly on observation-based nowcasting
products with frequent updates (typically with 5-min intervals) that are available within a few minutes. New NWP
forecasts are started only every 3 h after a rather long cut-off time to wait for incoming observational data and are
available to the forecaster after a longer computation time. Convection-allowing ensemble NWP is only able to
reach/outperform the quality of nowcasting at later forecasting times.

Nowcasting and ensemble NWP are typically treated as two separate and independent methods, and there
are few common products available for the forecasters.

The goal of SINFONY is to provide new products from observation time up to +6 h / +12 h for our fore-
casters combining nowcasting and NWP. To enable the development of these new combined products the currently
deterministic nowcasting will be expanded to an ensemble approach and will consider life-cycle information
compared to a classical pure advection approach. A further prerequisite to deﬁne the best combination of both
systems is a thorough comparative veriﬁcation of nowcasting ensemble and NWP ensemble.

To narrow down the differences between nowcasting and NWP concerning forecast quality and methodol-
ogy, efforts are undertaken on the one hand by enhancements to both nowcasting and NWP separately and on
the other hand by mutual information exchange and combination, to further enhance the quality of both. One
component is the assimilation of further high-resolution observational data including 3D-radar-data, Meteosat
SEVIRI satellite data and lightning densities. In this context, a Rapid Update Cycle ensemble on the km-scale
with hourly updates and advanced model physics is envisaged for the ensemble NWP.

