Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-1802-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Challenges ahead for atmospheric boundary layer research: open debate

Jordi Vilà-Guerau de Arellano
Wageningen University, Meteorology and Air Quality, Wageningen, Netherlands (jordi.vila@wur.nl)

The canonical view of the atmospheric boundary layer, namely the convective and stable archetypes, has been
very successful in understanding and representing its dynamics. However, in the last decade, new observational
evidence and numerical studies have shown that there are still gaps of knowledge that inﬂuence not only boundary-
layer dynamics, but also large-scale weather processes and biochemical processes at the surface. Relevant ones
are: (a) transitional periods, (b) the role of surface heterogeneity and (c) the interactions with larger (meso-)
and smaller atmospheric (micro-) scales. More speciﬁcally, the morning and afternoon transition still require
deriving an appropriate scaling that adapts to the transitions between convective and stable conditions. In turn,
these unsteady situations are inﬂuenced by the surface ﬂux variability, the impact of non-local and non-stationary
processes or the inﬂuence of larger circulations driven by topography or land heterogeneity. The latter, depending
on the heterogeneity length scale, could induce secondary circulations that enhance cloud formation and its
intensity.

These processes normally occur at the regional scales in which the modelled large scales are explicitly re-
solved whereas smaller scalers, sub-kilometre, require to be parameterized, i.e. the grey zone. Last but not least,
it still an open discussion how to connect boundary-layer dynamics to other processes, which demand crossing
disciplines and move beyond the physics. Just to put a couple of examples closely connected to the transitions in
boundary layer dynamics and land heterogeneity: (a) the impact of clouds and aerosol (chemistry) by perturbing
radiation modiﬁes the surface and ABL dynamics and (b) the role of vegetation/soil (carbon diurnal cycle) in
controlling the partitioning between evapotranspiration and sensible heat ﬂux.

Our presentation takes a participative format in which the audience is an active part. First, we will shortly
introduce the subjects and attempt to deﬁne the challenges. Subsequently, we discuss how new instrumental
devices and ﬁne-scale large eddy simulations can contribute to advance in the understanding. Finally we will
discuss how to transfer this knowledge to weather and climate model to improve the representation of the
atmospheric boundary layer.

