Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-199, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2017. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Improving weather forecasts by assimilation of crowdsourced
meteorological data in NWP models

Gert-Jan Steeneveld (1), Sytse Koopmans (1), and Ronald van Haren (2)
(1) Wageningen University, Meteorology and Air Quality Section, Wageningen, Netherlands (gert-jan.steeneveld@wur.nl), (2)
Netherlands eScienceCenter, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Crowdsourcing and citizen science contributions have become more and more a valuable approach in the at-
mospheric sciences. Hobby meteorologists put forward their collected data on platforms as www.netatmo.com
, www.weathersignal.com , www.wunderground.com, and wow.metofﬁce.gov.org. Moreover smartphones provide
pressure observations, air temperature, humidity directly from sensors, but can also be estimated from smartphone
battery temperatures. In addition, many weather observations are being collected from a variety of transport modes.
This development helps to understand the weather in data-scarce regions. So far, crowdsourced data have mainly
been used for academic research by evaluating them against routine observations, and for numerical model val-
idation. In this study we explore the added value of crowdsourced observations in numerical weather prediction
via data-assimilation into initial ﬁelds of the Weather Research and Forecasting model. The highest relevance is
expected for weather phenomena are characterised by small-scale processes, since the crowdsourced data are excel-
lent for ﬁlling gaps in route measurement networks. In this study we will apply data assimilation of private weather
station data for forecasting the urban heat island (UHI) effect of Amsterdam at 100 m grid spacing. Thereto we
present a new method for assimilating air temperatures into an urban canopy scheme. It is shown that the additional
data assimilation improves the UHI prediction. Moreover, we will show that data assimilation of private weather
stations observations substantially improves the forecast for a squall line that inundated a large part of Amsterdam
on July 28th 2014. With data assimilation, both intensity and location are substantially improved.

