Geophysical Research Abstracts
Vol. 20, EGU2018-3157-1, 2018
EGU General Assembly 2018
© Author(s) 2018. CC Attribution 4.0 license.

Using global satellite and in-situ information to constrain CO2 emissions
Philippe Ciais (1), Thomas Lauvaux (1), Felix Vogel (2), Yasjka Meijer (3), Yilong Wang (1), Franck Lespinas
(1), Max Reuter (4), Michael Buchwitz (4), Grégoire Broquet (1), and François Marie Bréon (1)
(1) Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l’Environnement LSCE, Gif sur Yvette, France, (2) Environment and Climate
Change Canada | Environnement et Changement Climatique Canada ECCC, Toronto, Canada, (3) EOP-SM - Earth and
Mission Science Division ESA ESTEC, Noordwijk The Netherlands, (4) Institute of Environmental Physics (IUP), Bremen,
Germany

Attempts to use atmospheric CO2 and tracer measurements for constraining surface-atmosphere CO2 anthro-
pogenic emissions at various scales using atmospheric inversions are motivated by the need to improve bottom
up accounting of human-induced emissions following the Paris Agreement on Climate. Different scales are
addressed below, from sub-continental regions to countries and from countries to cities and large point sources.
Policy makers not only need accurate and transparent information on emissions, but also, and more importantly
on emission trends. Because anthropogenic emissions are spatially concentrated in cities, industrial centers and
power plants, a key focus is on urban and industrial ‘hot-spots’ of emissions with high resolution observations and
to use tracers that can separate the signal of fossil fuel CO2 sources.

The European Copernicus CO2 Report [Ciais et al., 2015] recommended an observing strategy based on
sampling emissions hotspots using a constellation of satellites that could produce 2-d images of XCO2. Research
studies showed that a typical spatial resolution of 2 km x 2 km and individual sounding precision of less than 1
ppm would be sufﬁcient to provide an error reduction of up to 50% on the emission of a large city [Broquet et
al., 2017] or a large power plant [Bovensmann et al., 2010]. Actual column CO2 measurements [Nassar et al.,
2017] from OCO-2 acquired during satellite overpasses of a few large power plants and inverted with a Gaussian
plume model showed U.S. power plants emission estimates could be constrained within 1–17% of reported
daily emission values [Nassar et al., 2017]. Additional results on the estimation of CO2 emissions from large
cities using OCO-2 data [Lauvaux et al. in prep] will be shown. The ability of a constellation of satellite XCO2
imagers to quantitatively constrain the national or regional budgets of CO2 emissions from the sum of hotspots
emissions observations, given the coverage and time sampling of the satellites, is still an open scientiﬁc question.
Preliminary results from a global inversion of CO2 emissions from emission hotspots will be presented to illustrate
the potential of imagers.

Because smaller sources will not be detected from space, and because total CO2 also in hot-spot areas
contain signiﬁcant contributions from ecosystem ﬂuxes, it has been proposed to complement satellites by
continental scale sampling of 14C in CO2 and other fossil fuel CO2 tracers like carbon monoxide [Levin et al.,
2003; Levin and Karstens, 2007]. Measuring 14C in CO2 (radiocarbon) represents the most promising approach
for separating fossil CO2 in the atmosphere from the signal of natural ﬂuxes and hence for inversions to constrain
fossil fuel CO2 emissions. Results from an OSSE study to quantify fossil fuel CO2 emissions at the scale of
a mid-size European country was performed by [Wang et al., 2017], involving a coarse resolution transport
model and continental scale networks consistent with ICOS to assess the ‘uncertainty reduction’ estimated from
a Bayesian inversion and the performance of the inversion scheme to retrieve a ’true’ emission ﬁeld will be
presented.

